                                               ISSN 2443-8014 (online)




                   Ex Post Evaluation
                   of the Economic
                   Adjustment
                   Programme
                   Portugal, 2011-2014

                   INSTITUTIONAL PAPER 040 | NOVEMBER 2016

EUROPEAN ECONOMY




                   Economic and
                   Financial Affairs
European Economy Institutional Papers are important reports analysing the economic
situation and economic developments prepared by the European Commission's Directorate-General
for Economic and Financial Affairs, which serve to underpin economic policy-making by the
European Commission, the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament.

Views expressed in unofficial documents do not necessarily represent the views of the European
Commission.




LEGAL NOTICE

Neither the European Commission nor any person acting on its behalf may be held responsible for
the use which may be made of the information contained in this publication, or for any errors which,
despite careful preparation and checking, may appear.


This paper exists in English only and can be downloaded from
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/.

                          Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers
                             to your questions about the European Union.

                                               Freephone number (*):
                                          00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11
     (*) The information given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or hotels may charge you).


More information on the European Union is available on http://europa.eu.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2016


KC-BC-16-040-EN-N (online)                                 KC-BC-16-040-EN-C (print)
ISBN 978-92-79-54355-5 (online)                            ISBN 978-92-79-54354-8 (print)
doi:10.2765/094591 (online)                                doi:10.2765/257396 (print)



© European Union, 2016
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs




Ex Post Evaluation of the Economic
Adjustment Programme
Portugal, 2011-2014




EUROPEAN ECONOMY                                         Institutional Paper 040
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This evaluation has been carried out by a team of economists of the European Commission. The team was
led by Daniel Daco and included Ana Agúndez García, Alessandro Angelini, Luigi De Sanctis, Zivile
Didziokaite, Jorge Durán Laguna, Christine Frayne, Milda Valentinaite, Samuel Whittaker, and Michael
Sket during the first part of the project. Statistical support was provided by Alberto Noriega Guerra.

The evaluation benefited from guidance from an Inter-service Steering Group chaired by Matthias Mors
(DG ECFIN). The following staff members of the European Commission formed the Steering Group:
Elena Flores Gual (DG ECFIN), Peer Ritter (DG COMP), Tanguy De Launois (DG FISMA), Aron Kiss
(DG EMPL), Fabienne Corvers (SECGEN), Andrew Winter (DG ECFIN). Adina Onofrei (SECGEN)
contributed to the work of the Steering Group as alternate member.




                                                                                                         3
    ABBREVIATIONS

    ALMP - Active Labour Market Policy

    AMC - Asset Management Company

    BANIF - Banco Internacional do Funchal

    BCP - Banco Comercial Português

    BdP - Banco de Portugal

    BES - Banco Espírito Santo

    BFL - Budget Framework Law

    BIS – Bank for International Settlements

    BPI - Banco Português de Investimento

    BPN - Banco Português de Negócios

    BRRD - Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive

    BSSF - Bank Solvency Support Facility

    CCL - Commitment Control Law

    CdF - Conselho das Finanças Públicas

    CES - Extraordinary Solidarity Contribution

    CT 1 - Core Tier 1

    CET 1 - Common Equity Tier 1

    CGA - Caixa Geral de Aposentações

    CGD - Caixa Geral de Depósitos

    CIT – Corporate Income Tax

    CoCos - Contingent Convertible notes

    CS – Sustainability Contribution

    DFI – Development Financial Institution

    DG COMP - Directorate General 'Competition' of the European Commission

    DG ECFIN - Directorate General 'Economic and Financial Affairs' of the European Commission

    DG EMPL - Directorate General 'Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion' of the European
    Commission




4
DG FISMA - Directorate General 'Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union' of
the European Commission

DG TAXUD - Directorate General 'Taxation and Customs Union' of the European Commission

DGTF - Direçao –Geral do Tesouro e Finança

EA – Euro Area

EBA – European Banking Authority

EBITDA - Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization

EC – European Commission

ECB – European Central Bank

EFSF - European Financial Stability Facility

EFSM - European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism

EIB – European Investment Bank

EIF - European Investment Fund

ELA – Emergency Liquidity Assistance

EPL - Employment Protection Legislation

ESA - European System of Accounts

ESAME - Estrutura de Acompanhamento dos Memorandos (Program Monitoring Unit)

ESF - European Social Fund

ESFG - Espírito Santo Financial Group

ESI - Espírito Santo International

ESM - European Stability Mechanism

ETTRIC – Exercício Transversal de Revisão das Imparidades das Carteiras de Crédito

EU – European Union

FDI - Foreign Direct Investment

GDP – Gross Domestic Product

GGD – Gross Government Debt

HH - Household




                                                                                                        5
    HICP - Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices

    HNWI - High Net Worth Individuals

    IAPMEI - Agência para a Competitividade e Inovação

    IGCP - Agência de Gestão da Tesouraria e da Dívida Pública

    IMF – International Monetary Fund

    INE - Instituto Nacional de Estatística

    LME - Liability Management Exercise

    LTD - Loan-To-Deposit ratio

    LTRO - Long-term refinancing operation

    MEFP - Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies

    MFI – Monetary Financial Institution

    MIBEL - Mercado Ibérico de Electricidade

    MIBGAS - Mercado Ibérico do Gás

    MoU - Memorandum of Understanding on Specific Economic Policy Conditionality

    NFC – Non-Financial Corporation

    NGS - National Guarantee System

    NHS – National Health Service

    NIIP – Net International Investment Position

    NIM – Net Interest Margin

    NPL - Non-Performing Loan

    NRA - National Regulatory Authority

    NRP - National Reform Programme

    OECD - Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

    OIP - On-site Inspections Programme

    OMT - Outright Monetary Transactions

    PCA - Portuguese Competition Authority

    PER - Processo Especial de Revitalização



6
PES - Public Employment Service

PIT – Personal Income Tax

PPP – Public-Private Partnership

PPS – Post-Programme Surveillance

PSPP - Public Sector Purchase Programme

REFER - Rede Ferroviária Nacional

Repo – Repurchase Agreement

RoRC – Return on Risk Capital

RSI - Social Integration Income

SDR - Special Drawing Rights

SECGEN - Secretariat General of the European Commission

SGP - Stability and Growth Pact

SIP - Special Inspections Programme

SIREVE - Sistema de Recuperação de Empresas por Via Extrajudicial

SME - Small and Medium-sized Enterprise

SOE – State Owned Enterprise

TAP - Transportes Aéreos Portugueses

TFP – Total Factor Productivity

TSCG – Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance

ULC – Unit Labour Costs

UTAM - Unidade Técnica de Acompanhamento e Monitorização do Setor Público Empresarial

UTAP - Unidade Técnica de Acompanhamento de Projetos

VAT – Value Added Tax




                                                                                        7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This document presents an ex post evaluation of the three year EU/IMF financial assistance for
Portugal, which ended in May 2014. The three-year Portuguese programme was designed to overcome
the economic and financial crisis that led to Portugal requesting financial assistance in April 2011, when
the sovereign and banking sector were cut off from market funding. The programme made available
€52bn of European funding, split equally between the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and
the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM) and €26bn from the International Monetary
Fund (IMF). The Portuguese programme was the third economic adjustment programme for a euro area
(EA) country and made use of stabilisation instruments that were less than a year old at its inception. An
ex post evaluation of the design, implementation and outcome of the programme is required by the
European Commission, under the Better Regulation agenda (1). The aim is to draw lessons for the future,
in line with best practice.

The programme called upon Portugal to introduce reforms that were designed to address the
weaknesses that had rendered it so vulnerable to the effects of the global crisis, and to set it on a
stronger medium-term growth path. The assistance was made conditional on the implementation of
policy reforms that were set out in a Memorandum of Understanding on Specific Economic
Conditionality (MoU), accompanying the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP).
Amid a challenging external environment, the programme was intended to facilitate and buffer the
substantial economic adjustment that was both inevitable and necessary for Portugal to return to
economic soundness, by allowing for a more gradual unwinding of the unsustainable domestic and
external imbalances that built up in the pre-crisis period.

The Portuguese economy was characterised by a combination of poor performance and weak
competitiveness in the years preceding the crisis, alongside unsustainable public finances. Since the
early 90s, low productivity growth had led to sluggish economic growth, with rising unit labour costs and
deeply-rooted structural deficiencies eroding competitiveness. There were large and persistent fiscal
deficits, funding a large and inefficient public sector. By 2010, public debt stood at over 90% of GDP – in
part due to reclassifications. As the crisis spread, cracks appeared in the markets' faith of Portugal's ability
to pay back already high public and private debt.

Portugal requested financial assistance as bad economic news and deteriorating market conditions
priced the Portuguese banks and sovereign out of markets. As growth slowed and markets' appetite
for risk declined, Portuguese banks started experiencing financing difficulties in the international markets
from the beginning of 2009 due to the risk associated with their exposure to public and private debt.
Banks virtually lost market access in mid-2010, relying on the Eurosystem to meet their financing needs.
As borrowing and debt figures rose, the spreads on the Portuguese sovereign increased. The Portuguese
caretaker government requested financial assistance from the EFSM/EFSF and the IMF on April 7th 2011,
following the parliament's rejection of the government's stability programme.

The Portuguese programme correctly reflected the very difficult challenges that Portugal faced: to
address immediate fiscal risks and to overcome engrained structural weaknesses which were
responsible for Portugal's low potential growth. The programme rightly targeted an ambitious fiscal
consolidation underpinned by a number of fiscal governance and structural-fiscal measures. Over a three-
year period, the programme aimed at supporting progress in the orderly unwinding of the public and
private, internal and external imbalances and in increasing the growth potential, while mitigating negative
social impacts. In light of the need of correcting the country's imbalances, the programme aimed at
strengthening the banking sector. The challenges faced by the Portuguese economy were deep rooted and
tightly interwoven with vested interests; they could also not be solved through simple policy-levers.




(1) "Better regulation for better results – An EU agenda" (COM(2015) 215 final), "Better regulation guidelines" (SWD(2015) 111
    final).




                                                                                                                                 9
     The programme was effective in achieving its primary objective of restoring confidence in the
     Portuguese economy. It made tangible progress in putting the public finances on a more sustainable
     footing, improving competitiveness to support economic growth and addressing some of the
     weaknesses of the financial sector. Portugal was able to return to financial markets before the end of the
     programme, reflecting both the easing of the financial market conditions and the market perception that
     the economic weaknesses were being addressed. Portugal made good progress in addressing some of the
     structural impediments to growth that had built up over the years; however, not all the areas where reform
     was needed were effectively addressed during the three year programme horizon. Although it increased
     its resilience, the financial sector was still fragile at the end of the programme.

     The programme financing envelope was sufficient to meet Portugal's needs during the three years,
     but only because the increased access to market funding and other funding sources covered the
     higher financing requirements of the early years. The €78bn financing envelope was calculated based
     on the assumption that Portugal would continue rolling over part of its existing stock of short-term debt
     and slowly return to longer-term bond markets during the last part of the programme. In the early years,
     Portugal ran higher-than-expected government deficits, which it was able to cover by tapping short-term
     debt markets more than initially planned. Over the later programme months, it also accessed more longer
     term market financing than foreseen. Its ability to do this was both a testament to the programme's
     implementation and the result of an easing of market conditions following monetary authorities'
     decisions. Without the additional unforeseen market access, Portugal would have struggled to stay within
     the financial envelope set out in the programme, particularly in the early years.

     Portugal was able to effectively withdraw from the programme early thanks to the build-up of a
     substantial cash buffer. However, the reduced need for programme financing in the final months,
     contributed to a slow down of the pace of reforms, leaving the economy weaker than it would
     otherwise have been. Portugal exited its financial assistance programme in May 2014, without accessing
     the last €2.5 bn tranche of programme financing and without requesting any follow-up precautionary
     assistance. By the end of the programme Portugal had built up a sizeable cash buffer of €15.6 bn, which
     was more than the remaining deficit being projected in mid-2014 for the remainder of 2014 and 2015, put
     together. Taken together with the frontloading of the financing, it meant that the pressure on Portugal had
     eased by the end of the programme, which contributed to slow the reform process. This allowed the
     Portuguese government to avoid undertaking certain fiscal reforms and left Portugal with a looser
     underlying fiscal position at programme exit.

     The initial conditions of the EFSM/EFSF loans were set up to be broadly equivalent to the IMF
     loans, with short maturities and mark-ups for risks on the interest rates; during the programme the
     margins were cancelled and the maturities were extended twice. Under the original programme, the
     EFSM and EFSF loans were set up to be broadly equivalent to the terms of the IMF loans. In October
     2011, following decisions in the context of the Greek Loan Facility, the Council decided to cancel EFSM
     margins to programme countries and similar conditions were applied to EFSF loans, making all loans
     under these facilities considerably cheaper than the IMF ones. In addition, the maturities of the
     EFSM/EFSF loans to Portugal were extended twice, along with those of Ireland, in 2011 and 2013. By
     early 2015, Portugal's borrowing costs on the open market fell to below those of its IMF loans. In
     February 2015, the Eurogroup agreed to allow Portugal to repay over half of its IMF loans ahead of
     schedule, without an equivalent early repayment of its EFSM/EFSF loans. Portugal made its first early
     repayments to the IMF in 2015.

     The programme aimed at reducing the budget deficit and stabilising public debt, by acting on both
     expenditure and revenue and by streamlining the public sector through a number of fiscal-
     structural measures. The initial programme called for the budget deficit to achieve the 3% of GDP
     threshold by 2013, with public debt peaking in the same year. Fiscal measures were to be supported by a
     number of actions qualified as 'fiscal-structural measures', which consisted of reforms to the way the




10
public sector operates. Some of these measures built on plans that the Portuguese authorities had already
developed.

Portugal broadly met its fiscal targets – which were revised twice due to the impact of events
outside the control of the government – partly by making recourse to one-off and temporary
measures, undermining the long-term benefit of its policy choices. To meet its targets, Portugal made
use of one-offs and other extraordinary measures on both the revenue and expenditure sides, some of
which were meant to be replaced by permanent measures over a longer time period. In 2012 and 2013, the
fiscal targets were revised because of disappointing macroeconomic developments beyond the control of
the government; the rulings of the Constitutional Court overturned several programme measures with
significant fiscal impacts and hindered the achievement of the deficit targets. While the non-permanent
measures improved sustainability via their immediate impact on the debt, they do not lead to the
necessary lasting impact on the deficit. The alternative structural measures were not advanced promptly.
Overall, the quality of the consolidation was weaker than planned, but did allow Portugal to stay within
the financial envelope.

Portugal shied away from pursuing some of the most difficult measures that would help it over the
medium term, although a number of important fiscal structural measures were introduced to
improve the efficiency of the public sector. The inefficiencies in Portuguese public spending had
accumulated over the years and had a negative impact on Portugal's key weakness: economic growth.
Portugal did not make as much progress as desirable in addressing all these inefficiencies. However, the
programme achieved structural improvements in State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), Public Private
Partnerships (PPPs), the health system and fiscal governance. The absence of a comprehensive plan for a
reform of the state, underpinned by an exhaustive and up-front spending review, weighed on the
capability to achieve more consistent and sustained savings in the public sector and social security. For
instance, expenditure cuts to the public wage bill and pension expenditure were mainly temporary.

The extensive package of structural reforms in the Memorandum of Understanding rightly
reflected the broad-based economic inefficiencies and distortions at the root of the crisis, but
implementation might have been better if there had been a sharper focus on critical areas. The
Portuguese programme included numerous and deep structural measures that touched on all the main
policy areas. This was because the Portuguese crisis was the result of broad-based economic
inefficiencies, unlike in some other countries where the problems were concentrated in a few sectors, like
housing and/or the financial sector. These weaknesses included a lack of adequate human capital, poorly
functioning labour markets, declining labour cost competitiveness, inefficiencies in product markets
characterised by excessive economic rents in many non-tradable sectors, an inefficient judicial system,
malfunctioning housing market and deficiencies in the business environment. The programme partners
agreed that all these areas needed to be tackled, at least in part, during the programme. The result was that
even if more emphasis was put in some areas (i.e. labour, judicial and housing reforms) there was not a
sufficient degree of prioritisation. The MoU envisaged a broad step change in the momentum of reform in
a country in which necessary reforms had not been forthcoming. At the same time, ambition and
pragmatism could have been better balanced, bearing in mind limits to administrative and political
capacity to address all problems at the same time.

Implementation of structural conditionality was uneven, with labour market reforms being more
strongly pursued, especially at the start of the programme. While many of the labour market reforms
were implemented in the first part of the programme, progress on other reforms was slower and patchier.
This was probably because the ground for labour market reforms was better prepared as already agreed
with the social partners in March 2011 and because labour market reforms are administratively easier to
implement. Delays in other reforms also appear to be partly linked to the relative strength of vested
interests. The timing of many reforms was influenced by factors including the need to conduct social
dialogue, the demands placed on the legislative system, or the desire for transitional periods or




                                                                                                                11
     protections. An earlier and more determined implementation of some reforms, especially concerning the
     product markets, would have had benefits and increased Portugal's future growth potential.

     The scope of the programme's labour market reforms was broadly correct in the sense that it
     matched the main challenges; important progress was achieved. Where programme performance was
     mixed, it seems to have been linked more to shortcomings in the detailed specification and
     implementation of measures – and long time lags – rather than major omissions in the programme design.
     Many of the measures in the MoU were based on a March 2011 tripartite agreement, between the
     government, employers and business representatives, and labour unions. While this limited the scope of
     the deregulation, it facilitated implementation. Important labour market reforms were adopted during the
     programme, and firms consider them to have had a significant impact. The momentum of reform,
     however, dropped over time and whilst progress has been made, further reforms are still needed.

     The measures covering product markets and framework conditions were overall well designed, but
     implementation was not as strong as in other areas. The programme essentially tried to address every
     area where there were factors eroding competition and/or unduly increasing domestic production costs.
     Under the programme umbrella, significant progress was made in important areas where reforms had
     been long due, including housing and judicial sectors, the electricity tariff debt, transport SOEs and road
     PPPs and the business environment. Implementation was weakened where the intended policies turned
     out to be politically or socially sensitive and in key areas with strong vested interests. Many of these
     measures were still pending at the end of the programme (e.g. energy, regulated professions or ports). The
     scale of reforms also stretched the Portuguese authorities' implementation capacity. In the latter part of
     the programme, these existing challenges appear to have been compounded by reform fatigue.

     Clearer communication on the necessity of structural reforms and their longer-term benefits might
     have helped overcome some of the resistance to reforms. Although the initial MoU linked the package
     of reforms with analysis of economic challenges and the necessity of adjustment, communication on the
     relationship between timely and effective implementation of structural measures and the programme
     goals could have been more consistent. At the same time, the scope of the reforms needed meant it should
     have been better communicated that a three years programme could only be the starting point of a
     necessarily longer-term reform process.

     The programme appropriately targeted strengthening the banking sector. The banking sector was
     expected to face considerable challenges, as a consequence of the needed correction of the country's
     structural imbalances. The programme strategy envisaged increasing the banks' resilience to delink their
     market access from the sovereign one and to reduce reliance on Eurosystem financing, while ensuring
     adequate liquidity to avert a credit crunch. The programme envelope contained €12 billion to be disbursed
     to the Bank Solvency Support Facility (BSSF) to support the financial sector. While the programme
     correctly identified the key issues faced by the banking sector, the scale of the problem was
     underestimated and resulted in policy implementation that left the banking system with too much residual
     weaknesses at the end of the programme.

     Both the programme design and the programme implementation should have pursued a more
     frontloaded adjustment of the banks' balance sheet. The programme design recognised the need to
     strengthen the banking regulation and supervision, and the banks' capital position, including through the
     combination of asset quality reviews and stress tests. The banks' capital levels increased during the
     programme. However, the asset quality reviews required repeated rounds to ensure adequate assessments.
     The stress tests did not foster prompt actions to improve the resilience of all the covered banks, including
     under stress scenarios. The supervisory authority did not require a more robust recapitalisation/
     restructuring of the banks. With Banco de Portugal (BdP) responsible for the design and implementation
     of the bank recapitalisation, the programme could have better emphasized the importance of the different
     strategies, provided more detailed guidance and put more pressure on implementation. Bank supervision
     actions should also have been tighter with regard to provisioning and write-offs, especially when the



12
problems related to the economic slow-down became more evident. A publicly available analysis, in the
programme context, about the advantages and drawback of different options to tackle non-performing
loans (NPLs) could also have been helpful, to support the implementation of the most effective policies.

A prompter adjustment of the troubled Banif and Banco Espírito Santo (BES) would have been
beneficial, and a more forceful approach towards Caixa Geral de Depósitos (CGD) could also have
been warranted. BES and Banif were resolved after the end of the programme. With the benefits of
hindsight, a more forceful supervisory approach could also have fostered the adjustment of the two banks,
although in the case of BES some elements leading to its resolution emerged only gradually. Prompter
action could have reduced the potential costs, without causing financial instability; the resolution
framework had been promptly put in place. In the case of CGD, a deeper streamlining of the bank,
possibly accompanied by concrete steps towards its full privatization, could have helped reduce the
contingent risks for the state and foster competition in the banking sector. Prompter supervisory or
resolution action would have been manageable, within the envelope for the financial sector set up by the
programme, since about half of it (€6.4 billion) was not used during the programme.

The programme rightly contained requirements to deal with high private debt and provide credit
to the viable firms, but progress in developing financial instruments outside the banking system
was limited. During the programme, bank lending decreased more and for longer than initially projected
due to declining credit demand and supply. By 2013 credit flows were re-orientated towards more
productive and tradable sectors, but the overall adjustment of the private sector balance sheet is yet to be
completed. To maximize the short-term effectiveness, the Portuguese authorities targeted initiatives to
foster lending through the banking channel. More progress in the development of the capital markets
could have contributed to pave the way for a sustained recovery. Better coordination at the level of both
the Portuguese and the EU authorities, together with the set-up of ad hoc task forces, could have been
helpful.

Social and distributional considerations were rightly taken into account when designing many of
the programme measures. Many programme measures included provisions with strong progressive
effects and to protect the worse off. Tax increases, public wages and pension cuts were designed in a
progressive way, minimum wages and the lowest pensions were untouched and the coverage of some
social benefits was extended (e.g. unemployment benefits), while their generosity was reduced. However,
some fiscal measures – such as the reform of the minimum income guaranteed scheme – were regressive
and could have been avoided or limited in scope. The historically very high poverty and income
inequality levels of Portugal indicated that there was scope for clear improvement of the social protection
system. The efficiency of the social expenditure to ensure proper targeting to the most in need and
adequate incentives could have been strengthened during the programme.

Mitigating the negative social impacts of the adjustment was part of the programme objectives, but
no explicit social goals or specific requirements on monitoring social developments were set. Given
the importance of fair burden sharing in maintaining public support for the programme, distributional
issues could have been more clearly, explicitly and systematically addressed in programme reviews and
reports. Setting hard targets in this area may be difficult. But more emphasis on monitoring and reporting
on the social dimension would have been warranted. There is a public perception that the outcome of the
programme was socially unbalanced. Since the monitoring and reporting aspects were largely overlooked,
there is insufficient evidence to corroborate or refute this perception.

The Portuguese programme benefited from strong political commitment, including a strong
organisational response. The negotiations on the Economic Adjustment Programme took place in a
cooperative environment in consultation with the main opposition parties and other civil society partners.
The Programme received public support from the then main opposition parties which suggested a
broadly-based political ownership of the programme at its inception and a commitment to sound
implementation. Portugal established promptly a special unit (ESAME), which reported to the Prime



                                                                                                               13
     Minister, with the task of monitoring the implementation of the programme, in liaison with the line
     Ministers. Taken together, this meant that Portugal was able to exploit the positive relationship with its
     partners.

     Portugal made good reform progress over the programme years, but faced challenges that can only
     be fully resolved taking a longer-term perspective. Despite Portugal's commitment to change, its long-
     standing structural weaknesses would realistically have required ongoing reform beyond the programme
     period. The reforms undertaken in the programme should form a solid basis for the transition back to
     sound economic conditions, provided they are not rolled back. To capitalise on these improvements, it is
     important that Portugal continues to pursue reforms further strengthening its competitiveness and
     ensuring sustainable public finances.

     The following lessons can be drawn from this ex post evaluation of the Portuguese financial assistance
     programme, in light of the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and value added of the programme:

     Financing Needs

     Assumptions about financing needs should be prudent so as to reflect the uncertainties prevailing at the
     time, such as contingent liabilities of the public sector and market access developments. The size of the
     financial envelope should add credibility to the programme's overall objective of facilitating return to the
     sovereign financial markets.

     Earmarking the financial envelope for the banking sector helps prevent its use for other needs especially
     in the presence of a delayed adjustment of the banks' balance sheet.

     A specified target for cash buffer developments should be part of the programme envelope design. The
     latter contributes to market access and a clean exit from the programme, but can reduce the incentives
     for reform over time.

     The intervention at EU level adds significant value in terms of expertise, credibility, coherence with other
     EU policies and provides for an adequate financing envelope at very low costs.

     Fiscal Policy and Structural Reforms

     When a crisis is rooted in broad-based economic and fiscal inefficiencies, programmes should include a
     wide package of structural and fiscal-structural reforms, embedded in a clear strategy which allows a
     focus on the most macro-critical weaknesses affecting the functioning of the economy and the
     sustainability of public finances. Including other reforms risks overstretching administrative capacity and
     making decisions on the completion of the regular programme reviews more complex.

     At the very beginning of the programme, an overall strategic plan, underpinned by an in-depth spending
     review, should be set to steer and frame the ensuing fiscal effort. This plan should be immediately
     followed by further analysis to single out a few reforms on which political capital and administrative
     capacity should be prioritised. For these reforms, detailed implementation plans should become
     gradually part of the MoU with strong specific monitoring. The use of technical assistance should be
     considered.

     When an upfront comprehensive strategy for expenditure cannot be undertaken quickly, it may be more
     effective to focus on revenue increases, even when there is a clear need for expenditure cuts. This should
     buy more time for implementing structural expenditure measures, while limiting the recourse to one-off
     and temporary measures.




14
When consolidation is excessively based on temporary measures, further improvements may still be
needed after the end of the programme. In a climate of reform fatigue, the expiration of temporary
measures or the unwinding of other measures without proper replacement is a sign of the insufficient
leverage of post-programme surveillance. The corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) can
help deliver some of the needed improvements, as would be the case with any other EU country.

High levels of domestic political and social sensitivity and strong vested interests can lead to delays and
mixed implementation of key structural reforms. Strong prioritisation and clear communication are
necessary for maintaining national ownership of the reform process, overcoming resistance and
achieving implementation of fair and efficient reforms.

The necessary labour market reforms should be implemented without delay. If product market reforms
cannot proceed at the same pace, they must be accelerated as much as possible in order to make the
overall process more effective and fair.

Banking Sector

Strengthening and cleaning the banking sector is a crucial part of facilitating the correction of a
country's macro-imbalances. This correction also requires other policy measures, including fostering
private debt restructuring and maintaining an adequate level of credit to viable firms.

The bank capital requirements should reflect credible assumptions on the losses yet to be realised.
Independent top-down and bottom-up assessments are instrumental to increase transparency and
confidence about the estimation of capital needs. Losses should, in turn, be promptly recognised.

A publicly available analysis about the advantages and drawback of different options to tackle NPLs is
helpful. Reducing NPLs requires the prompt implementation of a balanced combination of different
policies, including enhancing supervision, developing distressed debt markets, facilitating company
restructuring.

Active capital markets are an important buffer for financing the real economy when the banking sector is
under restructuring. Their development is difficult in a programme context, when other immediate
pressures are high, and requires time and coordinated efforts from national and supranational
authorities.

Restoration of banks' viability and market confidence go hand in hand, in a mutually reinforcing process.
Policy aimed at addressing the weaknesses of a banking sector in a country subject to a macro
adjustment should be implemented promptly and forcefully, in order to avoid delayed tackling of
problems that could jeopardise the overall programme's achievements.

Social Developments

The social impact of the crisis and of the adjustment process should be regularly monitored and reported
upon in programme documents.

While it is known that economic crises and the subsequent adjustment can have high social costs, the
distributional and social implications are generally difficult to estimate accurately at the start of the
programme. However, programme measures should be shaped to take equity and social considerations
into account, aiming at progressive burden-sharing and protection of the most vulnerable.

Ownership




                                                                                                              15
     Sustained ownership is crucial for programme success. However, ownership can be negatively affected by
     several factors, including the absence of a strong plan for the most comprehensive reforms, of clear
     communication on structural reforms long term benefits and on the distributional impact of the reforms,
     as well as the relaxation of the financial constraints once the country returns to the market. Overall,
     reform fatigue and time needed for structural reforms to be implemented and yield results raise questions
     about the optimal duration of a programme and the trade-off between ownership and return to the
     market.




16
CONTENTS


1.   Introduction                                                                                     23


2.   Weak growth and rising debt: an accident waiting to happen                                       25

     2.1.   Introduction                                                                              25
     2.2.   A gradual build up of macroeconomic imbalances                                             26
     2.3.   Surveillance failed to trigger the correction of external imbalances                       31
     2.4.   The global crisis and the run up to the programme                                          32


3.   Financing needs                                                                                  37

     3.1.   Programme strategy                                                                        37
     3.2.   Outturn and post-programme developments                                                    39
     3.3.   Assessment of the programme financing                                                      42


4.   Fiscal policy                                                                                    47

     4.1.   Key challenges and programme design                                                        47
     4.2.   Implementation                                                                            50
            4.2.1. Pace and composition of fiscal consolidation                                        50
            4.2.2. Flanking the expenditure effort                                                     60
            4.2.3. Getting a broader and deeper control of fiscal dynamics                             63
            4.2.4. Flanking the revenue effort                                                         64
     4.3.   Overall outcome and assessment                                                             65


5.   Structural reforms                                                                               71

     5.1.   Key challenges and programme design                                                        71
     5.2.   Reforming the labour market to create jobs and help rebalance the economy                  72
            5.2.1. Labour market reforms                                                               73
            5.2.2. Education and skills                                                               78
            5.2.3. Overall assessment of labour market measures in the programme                       79
     5.3.   Removing distortions to investment allocation: goods and services markets and framework
            conditions.                                                                               81
            5.3.1. Goods and services markets                                                          82
            5.3.2. Framework conditions                                                               86
            5.3.3. Overall assessment of product markets and framework conditions measures in the
                  programme                                                                           93
     5.4.   Overall outcome and assessment                                                             94


6.   Banking sector policies                                                                          99

     6.1.   Key challenges and programme design                                                        99
     6.2.   Programme implementation                                                                  101
            6.2.1. Strengthening the banking sector                                                   101




                                                                                                            17
                 6.2.2. Unwinding the imbalances                                                       107
          6.3.   Overall outcome and assessment                                                        108


     7.   Social developments                                                                          113

          7.1.   Background and programme design                                                       113
          7.2.   Developments in social outcomes                                                       116
          7.3.   Overall assessment                                                                    120


     8.   Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges                                         123

          8.1.   A slow recovery                                                                       123
          8.2.   Rebalancing                                                                           126
          8.3.   Macroeconomic risks and medium-term challenges                                        131


     9.   Conclusions                                                                                  135


     Annex1.           Evaluation process                                                              144


     Annex2.           The Portuguese Authorities' views on the ex post evaluation                     156


     References                                                                                        162




     LIST OF TABLES
          2.1.   2010: Banks in a snapshot                                                              34
          4.1.   Fiscal Targets (% of GDP – ESA-95)                                                     50
          4.2.   Overview of macroeconomic data (y-o-y % change - ESA-95)                               51
          4.3.   Overview of fiscal figures (% of GDP - ESA-95)                                         51
          4.4.   Fiscal targets vs outturns (% of GDP – ESA-95 unless otherwise stated)                 52
          4.5.   Change in employment in public administration (y-o-y % change)                         60
          4.6.   Structural Balance (% of potential GDP at current prices – ESA-2010)                   66
          6.1.   Banks' recapitalization (1)                                                           101
          6.2.   Portuguese banks in a snapshot                                                        109
          8.1.   Comparison of macroeconomic projections at the start of the programme with outturns
                 and forecasts (y-o-y change if not otherwise indicated)                               123




     LIST OF GRAPHS
          2.1.   Income relative to euro area                                                           25
          2.2a. Public revenues and expenditures                                                        26




18
2.2b. Net lending per sector                                                                26
2.3a. Real GDP growth                                                                       27
2.3b. GDP per capita                                                                        27
2.4a. Current account balance                                                               28
2.4b. NIIP                                                                                  28
2.5a. Average growth in labour compensation components                                      29
2.5b. Saving and investment balance                                                         29
2.6a. Private Sector non-consolidated Debt                                                  30
2.6b. GDP growth and its components, Portugal                                               30
2.7a. General Government deficit and debt (% of GDP)                                        31
2.7b. General Government - Total revenue/expenditure (ESA2010)                              31
2.8.   Financial market distress                                                            33
2.9a. Loan to Deposit ratio in EA in 2010                                                   33
2.9b. Private debt in EA in 2010                                                            33
2.10a. Portugal - CDS 5 Yr                                                                  35
2.10b. General Government debt                                                              35
3.1a. PLAN - Use of funds, June 2011 - June 2014, EUR bn and % of total Funds               40
3.1b. PLAN - Sources of funding, June 2011 - June 2014, EUR bn and % of total Sources       40
3.1c. OUTTURN - Use of funds, June 2011 - June 2014, EUR bn and % of total Funds            40
3.1d. OUTTURN - Sources of funding, June 2011 - June 2014, EUR bn and % of total Sources    40
3.2.   Spreads compared to German 10-yr Bund                                                43
3.3a. Evolution of Portuguese sovereign yield curve                                         44
3.3b. 10-year yields                                                                        44
4.1.   Domestic arrears                                                                     64
4.2.   Gross Government Debt Developments                                                   67
4.3a. The strength of fiscal frameworks                                                     69
4.3b. FRI and structural government balances for euro-area member states                    69
5.1a. Monthly minimum wage and share of workers covered                                     74
5.1b. Monthly minimum wage and other wage and cost indices                                  74
5.2.   Number of collective agreements signed and workers covered                           75
5.3a. Employment by type (permanent, temporary, self-employed), year-on-year changes        80
5.3b. Nominal unit labour costs (2000=100), whole economy                                   80
5.4.   Product Market Regulation                                                            81
5.5a. Clearance Rate, 2010                                                                  87
5.5b. Disposition Time, 2010                                                                87
5.6a. Direct Awards                                                                         90
5.6b. Public tenders                                                                        90
5.7a. Ease of doing business ranking                                                        91
5.7b. Birth rate (%) of enterprises by economic activity                                    91
6.1a. Non performing to Total Gross Loans, Ratio                                           102
6.1b. Tier1 Capital                                                                        102
6.2a. Eurosystem Borrowing                                                                 104




                                                                                                 19
     6.2b. Loan to Deposit Ratio                                                                         104
     6.3.   Bank assets and liabilities                                                                  104
     6.4a. Banks' holdings of sovereign bonds, % of total assets                                         109
     6.4b. Target 2 (liabilities)                                                                        109
     6.5a. Portugal - Bank Loans to NFCs                                                                 110
     6.5b. Interest Rates - Loans to NFCs, up to 1Y                                                      110
     6.6a. non-consolidated Private Debt                                                                 111
     6.6b. NFC Debt to Surplus, Ratio                                                                    111
     7.1a. Developments in poverty and social exclusion, 2006-2014                                       114
     7.1b. Inequality indicators, 2005-2014, PT and EU-27                                                114
     7.1c. Social protection spending in Portugal                                                        114
     7.1d. Severere material deprivation, 2006-2015                                                      114
     7.2a. Unemployment rates, PT, 2006-2015.                                                            117
     7.2b. At risk of poverty rates by working status, PT, 2006-2014                                     117
     7.2c. International migrations (long-term immigrants/emigrants), 2002-2013, PT                      117
     7.3.   Simulation of impact of 2009-2012 fiscal consolidation measures (% of household disposable
            income, by income deciles)                                                                   119
     7.4a. Access to health care - Unmet needs, PT                                                       120
     7.4b. Average price of medicines in NHS market, PT                                                  120
     7.5a. Access to education and trainig - early leavers , PT                                          120
     7.5b. Access to housing - cost overburden rate, PT                                                  120
     8.1a. Real GDP                                                                                      124
     8.1b. Unemployment                                                                                  124
     8.2.   Decomposition of short-term growth                                                           125
     8.3a. Consumption                                                                                   125
     8.3b. Gross capital formation                                                                       125
     8.4a. Exports                                                                                       126
     8.4b. Imports                                                                                       126
     8.5a. Relative price of tradables                                                                   127
     8.5b. Weight of tradables                                                                           127
     8.6a. Main goods' export destinations                                                               128
     8.6b. Exports of goods by categories                                                                128
     8.7a. Terms of trade                                                                                128
     8.7b. Real effective exchange rate (ULC)                                                            128
     8.8a. Labor force and employment                                                                    129
     8.8b. Working-age population                                                                        129
     8.9a. GDP per person employed                                                                       129
     8.9b. Real unit labor costs                                                                         129
     8.10a. Decomposition of net lending                                                                 130
     8.10b. Corporate saving and investment                                                              130
     8.11a. Cost of borrowing for NFC                                                                    131
     8.11b. Changes in the stock of loans                                                                131




20
   8.12. Yield 10-year government bond in 2016                                                  132




LIST OF BOXES
   4.1.   Some considerations on the impact of the change from ESA-95 to ESA-2010 in Portugal    56
   4.2.   Constitutional Court rulings on fiscal consolidation measures                          58
   6.1.   The process of adjusting BES and Banif                                                106




                                                                                                      21
1.            INTRODUCTION

In June 2014, Portugal's economic adjustment programme supported by EU-IMF financial assistance
ended. The programme was meant to overcome the economic and financial crisis that brought Portugal to
request assistance in April 2011 when the sovereign and the banking sector were increasingly cut off from
market funding. Amid a challenging external environment, the programme was intended to facilitate the
substantial economic adjustment and to buffer its impact, including by supporting the unwinding of
unsustainable domestic and external imbalances built up during the pre-crisis period. The primary
programme objectives were to restore confidence, put the public finances on a sustainable footing,
stabilise the financial sector and underpin competitiveness and sustainable economic growth.

The programme made available €52bn EU funding, split equally between the European Financial
Stability Facility (EFSF) and the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM) and €26bn from
the IMF. The provision of financial assistance was conditional on Portugal implementing policy reforms
that were set out in a Memorandum of Understanding on Specific Economic Policy Conditionality (MoU)
accompanying the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP).

This report presents the findings of the ex post economic evaluation of the programme design,
implementation and outcomes. The purpose of this evaluation is to assess the adjustment programme in
order to draw lessons to inform the policy debate and improve future policy-making, when designing and
implementing adjustment programmes, whether in the euro area or elsewhere. To do so, it looks at how
the design and implementation of the programme have contributed to the evolution of the Portuguese
economy and the attainment of the programme's objectives. The approach is qualitative in the sense that
the conclusions are based on economic judgement rather than on an econometric model. This is because it
is not possible to construct a credible counterfactual at a time of such changing economic conditions in
both Portugal and its partners. In addition, this approach allows the impact of aspects of the programme
which cannot be quantified but may nevertheless be important – such as the political context – to be
considered.

This evaluation is in response to the European Commission's requirement to evaluate the impact of its
policies. (2) Programme conditionality was jointly developed by staff from the Commission, IMF, ECB
and Portuguese authorities, and subsequently endorsed by the Eurogroup and the IMF Executive
Board. In accordance with this process, the evaluation does not consider the action of the programme
partners in isolation. The Commission's internal working arrangements, as well as those in relation to the
IMF and the ECB fall outside its scope, as do the actions of the Portuguese authorities prior to the
programme. In line with international good practice, particular care was taken to create an institutional
separation between the evaluation and the implementation of the programme itself, to ensure the
independence and impartiality of the exercise. Annex 1 provides more details on these arrangements.

Using the framework set out in the European Commission's evaluation standards, the evaluation considers
the Portuguese economic adjustment programme under the structure set out in Figure 1, below. Over a
three-year period, the programme provided financial assistance and aimed at addressing the imbalances of
the Portuguese economy and the loss of market confidence, through the implementation of a number of
fiscal, fiscal-structural, financial and structural measures. The financial assistance programme was
intended to cover Portugal's financing gap and to allow the country to regain market access, while putting
the public finances on a sustainable footing, stabilising the financial sector and underpinning a return to
economic growth. The relevance, appropriateness (efficiency) and effectiveness of the programme's
inputs are assessed in terms of their contribution to the programme's intended results over the programme
period and their impact on the economy of Portugal. Whilst the programme was a response to a crisis
scenario, the evaluation also draws conclusions on coherence and EU added value. Like all financial
assistance programmes, the Portuguese one is extensive and complex. Flexibility is needed to enable the


(2) "Better regulation for better results – An EU agenda" (COM(2015) 215 final), "Better regulation guidelines" (SWD(2015) 111
    final).




                                                                                                                                 23
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            programme to adapt to both internal and external economic development. For this reason, it is not
            straightforward to systematically disentangle the difference between the design of the programme and its
            implementation in the evaluation. Annex 1 discusses this in greater depth and provides more details on
            the overall evaluation approach. This evaluation is a performance rather than a compliance oriented
            exercise.

                                               Intervention logic of Economic Adjustment Programme for Portugal 2011-2014




                                                                                                               Intended Results
                         Needs/                              Inputs                  Outputs                                                           Intended
                                                                                                                Programme horizon
                        Challenges                                                                                                                      Impact

                 Public    finances       on                                                                Cover Portugal's financing gap
                 unsustainable trend                                                                           during the programme


                                                        Conditionality                                                                            Financial stability
               Economic recession rooted in                                                                     Restore confidence in
               significant structural weakness                                                                  Portuguese sovereign
                                                                            Implementation of:
                                                                                                                 and banking sector
                                                                            • Fiscal        consolidation
                                                       Negotiation and                                                                            Fiscal sustainability
               Financial sector vulnerabilities                               measures
                                                       policy dialogue
               Funding pressure on domestic                                 • Fiscal-structural measures
                                                                                                                 Put public finances on a
               banks                                                        • Financial sector measures
                                                                                                                   sustainable footing
                                                                            • Structural reforms                                                       Increase trend
                                                       Disbursement of                                                                                     growth
                High indebtedness of the             financial assistance
                                                                                                               Stabilise the financial sector
                private sector


                Market concerns about the                                                        Underpin a return to economic growth, supporting an
                solvency of the Portuguese                                                            orderly unwinding of external and internal
                sovereign and the banking                                                           imbalances, while increasing growth potential
                system




            The remainder of the report is organised as follows. Section 2 gives a short overview of the roots of and
            run-up to the crisis. Section 3 considers the size and terms of the financing envelope. Sections 4, 5, and 6
            assess policy design and results for the fiscal policy, structural reforms and financial sector, respectively.
            Section 7 analyses social developments during the programme period. Section 8 looks at the performance
            of the Portuguese economy and sheds light on the remaining challenges. Section 9 concludes by
            answering the evaluation questions about the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, added value and
            coherence of the programme with other EU policies and discusses some broader lessons from the
            experience of the economic adjustment programme. The evaluation is based on information available up
            to the end of June 2016. The method and process followed for this ex post evaluation are described in
            Annex 1. The Portuguese authorities' views on the ex post evaluation are reported in Annex 2.




24
2.             WEAK GROWTH AND RISING DEBT: AN ACCIDENT
               WAITING TO HAPPEN
This chapter reviews the circumstances that led to Portugal's request for external financial assistance.


2.1.    INTRODUCTION

The Portuguese crisis mainly resulted from a combination of poor economic performance and lack
of competitiveness in the years preceding the crisis and unsustainable public finances. For many
years the government ran large and persistent fiscal deficits often exceeding the limit set by the Stability
and Growth Pact (SGP). (3) These public deficits came along with a decade of economic stagnation
spurring doubts about the ability of the economy as a whole to pay back an already high level of public
and private debt.

The poor economic performance had led to the accumulation of significant external imbalances. For
many years, the economy had been performing poorly with very low growth with almost no catching-up
process with the EU average. Despite its initial low level of income, EU accession and sizeable Structural
Funds did not spur a strong convergence process. From 1992 to 2007 the Portuguese income per capita
hardly caught up: it was at 66% to 70% of the euro area GDP per capita (in purchasing power standards –
Graph 2.1). Moreover, at the turn of the millennium, cheaper borrowed funds thanks to the introduction of
Euro were not used for productivity-enhancing investments and led to the accumulation of significant
external indebtedness. The Portuguese economy entered a protracted slump associated with low
productivity growth, while rising unit labour costs and deeply-rooted structural deficiencies eroded
competitiveness.

                                                              140        Graph 2.1: Income relative to euro area

                                                              130
                                                              120
                                 % EA GDP per capita in PPS




                                                              110
                                                              100
                                                              90
                                                              80
                                                              70
                                                              60
                                                              50
                                                              40
                                                                    60 64 68 72 76 80 84 88 92 96 00 04 08 12
                                                                         PT            ES             EL           IE

                                                      Source: Ameco



Poor economic performance was deeply-rooted in structural deficiencies affecting most of the
functioning of the economy and in a large and inefficient public sector. As will be discussed in the
subsequent sections, the list of structural weaknesses is long: wage setting mechanisms not reflecting
changes in productivity, excessive and rigid labour market regulation, inefficient judiciary system,
obsolete insolvency legislation, barriers to entry in regulated professions. The Portuguese economy was
characterized by a large public sector with key areas dominated by large inefficient state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) sheltered from competition and henceforth able to maintain high margins and wages.



(3) If one considers the series after the reform that integrated in the government part of the state-owned enterprises, in fact it
    exceeded the limit systematically. See DG ECFIN (2008b) and IMF (2008).




                                                                                                                                     25
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Large public deficits were associated to the crisis but before the crisis there was a persistent gap
            between expenditures and revenues. These deficits stem from a structural gap between revenues and
            expenditures: both grew during this period, with the exception of expenditures in a short-lived fiscal
            consolidation in 2006-2007, but revenues systematically fell short of expenditures (Graph 2.2a). As a
            consequence, at the outburst of the financial crisis in 2008 outstanding public debt amounted already to
            about 70% of GDP. The situation worsened significantly in 2009 and 2010 when the general government
            deficit increased to around 10% of GDP. By the end of 2010 public debt was exceeding 90% of GDP.
            Markets reacted to this deterioration of public finances; during 2010 the spread with German 10-year
            bonds grew from below 1 pp to around 4 pp despite the swift economic recovery after the initial
            contraction. The vulnerability of the government was aggravated by the relatively low average maturity of
            public debt that contributed to spur doubts about the ability of the government to roll-over its debt, and
            the uncertainty on the underlying fiscal dynamics, due to the relatively weak fiscal governance.

                        53        Graph 2.2a : Public revenues and expenditures                 10           Graph 2.2b: Net lending per sector
                        51

                        49                                                                       5

                        47

                        45                                                                       0
                % GDP




                                                                                        % GDP




                        43
                                                                                                 -5
                        41

                        39
                                                                                                -10
                        37

                        35                                                                      -15
                             95     97   99   01   03   05   07   09   11   13    15                  95 97 99       01   03 05 07       09   11 13 15
                        excluding interests             Expenditures        Revenues                  Corporations         Households         Government
              Source: Ameco                                                            Source: Ameco



            The banking sector, like in many other euro area countries, acted as a risk transmission
            mechanism. The banking system was the main intermediary between the domestic financing needs and
            the external financing sources. The banks were exposed to the risks arising from the high domestic public
            and private debt, on the one hand, and the risks of not being able to refinance their own debt in the
            international markets, on the other hand. Increasing risk aversion in Europe and the slowdown of the
            Portuguese economy meant that the Portuguese banks started experiencing financing difficulties in the
            international markets already at the beginning of 2009. In a typical self-fulfilling prophecy, the financing
            terms of both the Portuguese state and banks deteriorated in parallel, until the banks virtually lost market
            access in mid-2010, relying on the Eurosystem to meet their financing needs.


            2.2.         A GRADUAL BUILD UP OF MACROECONOMIC IMBALANCES

            After accession to the European Union, Portugal experienced a short and mild boom in 1986-1992
            due to increased trade and EU transfers, reforms of SOEs and a benign external environment. In
            1986 Portugal entered the EU with a relatively low GDP per capita, significantly lagging behind the
            average economic development level of the EU Member States. SOEs were more prevalent than in other
            EU countries, with the non-financial ones accounting for 25% of value added and 12% of total
            employment. Over-extended public ownership reduced the level of competition and productivity in the
            Portuguese economy and was a (partly hidden) burden on the public finances. (4) In the first years after

            (4) A number of SOEs were monopolies. Public ownership reduced managerial incentives for cost reduction and technical advance.
                At aggregate level, SOEs were significantly loss making and accounted for the combined deficit of 8 percent of GDP in 1985-
                86.




26
                                                                                      2. Weak growth and rising debt: an accident waiting to happen




accession, the Portuguese economy grew by an average growth rate of 5.3%, ahead of Ireland and Spain.
This was due: firstly, to increased trade ties and the recovery from the crisis of the 1980s; secondly, to
market-driven policy giving public enterprise managers greater autonomy and improving the financial
situation of SOE with an aggregate effect of 7% of GDP; thirdly, favourable exogenous factors, such as
lower oil prices, lower interest rates, and the depreciation of the dollar played a role; finally, funds
allocated by the European Communities (averaging 1.5% of annual GDP during 1987-90) helped improve
the country's infrastructure and professional training. This period of relatively high growth allowed
Portugal to achieve an increase in the GDP per capita from 53% to 66% of (the future members of) the
euro area (in purchasing power standards – Graph 2.1). The Portuguese relative boom years ended with
the European exchange-rate crisis in 1992-93.

In the following years (1994-1999), Portugal's convergence to EU average GDP slowed, while the
foreign indebtedness of the country increased. Reforms to the public sector stalled. In spite of muted
growth (Graphs 2.3a and 2.3b), Portugal was steeply increasing its indebtedness towards foreign private
investors. Since the beginning of the 1990s, both public and private (corporations) borrowing induced
persistent high current account deficits – allowing domestic spending to outpace income (See Graph 2.2b
and 2.4a). The reliance on foreign borrowing was accelerated by the sharp fall in Portuguese long-term
interest rates from 10% in 1995 to around 4% before introduction of euro. Market participants deemed
that the value of their investments in the country would no longer be vulnerable to erosion through
currency depreciation. At the same time, the wage compensation growth significantly outpaced labour
productivity, by more than in Spain though less than in Greece. (See Graph 2.5b) This only came to an
abrupt halt when private foreign lending stopped flowing in in the context of the crisis.

                         Graph 2.3a: Real GDP growth                                                   Graph 2.3b: GDP per capita
           y-o-y                                                            45        '000 EUR
           % change
10
                                                                            40
                                                                            35
 5                                                                          30
                                                                            25
 0                                                                          20
                                                                            15
 -5                                                                         10
                                                                             5
-10                                                                          0
      86     88    90   92   94   96   98    00   02    04   06   08   10        86   88     90   92     94   96   98    00   02    04   06   08    10
              PT             ES         EL             IE         EA                    PT              ES          EL             IE          EA
      Source: European Commission                                                Source: European Commission




                                                                                                                                                         27
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                Graph 2.4a: Current account balance                                                              Graph 2.4b: NIIP
                                                                                                          % GDP
               5        % GDP                                                                      60
                                                                                                   40
               0                                                                                   20
                                                                                                    0
              -5                                                                                   -20
                                                                                                   -40
             -10                                                                                   -60
                                                                                                   -80
             -15                                                                                  -100
                                                                                                  -120
             -20                                                                                  -140
                   90     92    94        96   98        00   02    04   06        08   10               96       98        00      02      04        06   08   10
                                     PT             ES             EL         IE             EA                        PT           ES           EL        IE        EA

              Source: European Commission                                                          Source: European Commission


            Membership in the euro area since 1999 did not trigger another catching up process of the
            Portuguese economy. Despite access to favourable financing conditions, Portugal grew in 1999-2007
            less than other EU countries and the euro area on average and significantly less than Ireland, Spain, and
            Greece, which experienced a relative boom (Graph 2.3a). The productivity slowdown in Portugal was
            very pronounced: average growth of labour productivity fell from 5.7% in 1985-1992 to 0.8% in 1999-
            2006. Low productivity growth is the main source for the decline in growth of the Portuguese economy
            and persistently low living standard in terms of GDP per capita (5). Another factor was low labour
            utilisation due to increasing unemployment, reaching 9% in 2007. A large share of it was due to increases
            in long-term unemployment. The significant fall in total factor productivity (TFP) since 1999, represented
            the decline in technical, allocative and/or scale efficiency. (6) Having it stable, would have allowed the
            Portuguese economy to grow at an average rate of 3.5% instead of the observed rate of 1% in pre-crisis
            years (2002-2007). (7) Due to persistent current account deficits, net foreign assets of Portugal were
            sharply deteriorating (See Graph 2.4b).




            (5) Source: EU KLEMS database (Growth Accounting to 2007). The country files are based on the releases of November 2009 and
                March 2008 of the database produced by the Groningen Growth and Development Centre (The Netherlands).
            (6) Some authors emphasise lack of allocative efficiency in the Portuguese economy, notably in the largely non-tradable services'
                sector (Dias, D. et al, 2014), while other also point to lack of economies of scale due to policy measures favouring SMEs at the
                expense of large firms (Braguinsky, S. et al, 2011, Reis, R, 2013).
            (7) According to the European Commission estimates.




28
                                                                                  2. Weak growth and rising debt: an accident waiting to happen




                                                                               Graph 2.5b: Average growth in labour compensation
               Graph 2.5a: Saving and investment balance
                                                                                                  components
                                                                      10   %
       % of GDP
 35
                                                                       8
 30
                                                                       6
 25                                                                    4

 20                                                                    2

                                                                       0
 15
                                                                      -2
 10
                                                                      -4
  5                                                                        PT ES DE IE EL PT ES DE IE EL PT ES DE IE EL
                                                                                1996-1999              2000-2007              2008-2011
  0
      97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11                          ULC        Labour productivity, constant prices    Labour compensation

              Savings (S)      Investment (I)      SI deficit          Source: OECD
  Source: Eurostat


Borrowed funds were not used for productivity-enhancing investments in the tradable sectors,
which would have allowed a rebalancing through improved export performance. While it is not
unusual for catching-up countries to run-up sizeable current account deficits when investing to build up
their capacity, this should lead in the medium term to current account surpluses since investments
increase performance in tradable sectors and have positive effects on growth. This did not occur in
Portugal. At the end of the 1990s, Portugal had a very high investment spending as a share of GDP (above
those of Spain, Ireland, Greece and Germany), which was falling in the 2000s. Foreign borrowing took
also place because of relatively low levels of saving (8), supporting excess consumption and investment
but at the cost of building up a debt burden (Graph 2.5a). The tax regime also favoured consumption and
the accumulation of debt in the NFC sector. (9) Increasing indebtedness was a problem to the extent that
higher investment did not result in higher growth or gains in export market shares.

Favourable financing conditions also allowed banks, corporates, and private households to
accumulate significant debts. Most of the capital inflows came through the domestic banking sector.
Corporate capital market financing and foreign direct investment flows were marginal. Credit availability
at low rates and low propensity to save fuelled consumer spending (Graph 2.6b). As a result, the
indebtedness of both households and non-financial corporations already high in the beginning of 2000s
(significantly above the euro area average) further increased (Graph 2.6a). The construction sector and
real estate services were particularly leveraged, with the ratio of bank loans to gross value added of 195%
in 2003-H1 2008 – again amongst the highest in euro area. (10)




(8) While most of the euro area countries had a relatively stable savings rate to GDP for the total economy of around 20-25% in
     2000s, with the notable exception of Greece, in Portugal this ratio has declined from an already low level of 18% in 2000 to
     11% in 2008. Investment fell as well but less than savings opening a gap filled-in by foreing borrowing (source: AMECO
     database).
(9) The implicit tax rate on consumption was below EU and euro area averages, mainly due to extensive use of the reduced VAT
     rates. The Portuguese tax system had a significant debt bias, measured as the difference between the effective marginal tax rates
     for new equity and debt-funded investment. See Section 4.
(10) ECB (2013a). Once banks started deleveraging in the early stages of the crisis in 2008, this sector suffered the most, resulting in
     large increases in unemployment, as the employment in the sector reduced by around half. Source: Eurostat.




                                                                                                                                                     29
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                             Graph 2.6a: Private Sector non-consolidated Debt                       Graph 2.6b: GDP growth and its components, Portugal
              300      % of GDP
                                                                                               6     pps.

              250                                                                              4

                                                                                               2
              200
                                                                                               0
              150
                                                                                               -2

              100                                                                              -4

                                                                                               -6
               50
                                                                                               -8
                0
                                                                                              -10
                    07Q1

                           07Q3

                                  08Q1

                                         08Q3

                                                09Q1

                                                       09Q3

                                                              10Q1

                                                                     10Q3

                                                                               11Q1

                                                                                       11Q3          00     01   02    03    04   05   06   07     08    09    10    11
                                                                                                            Private Consumption                  Government Consumption
                           PT HH           PT NFCs            EA            Private sector                  Investment                           Inventories
                                                                                                            Net exports                          GDP growth (y-o-y % change)
               Source: European Commission, OECD
                                                                                              Source: European Commission


             Portugal presented persistently high budget deficits. With hindsight, Portugal's budget deficit (net of
            one-off deficit decreasing measures) was above 3% of GDP in all years since at least 1995. (11) Fiscal
            deficits were driven by public expenditure increasing faster than public revenue, while tax revenues as a
            share of GDP also increased in the pre-crisis period (Graph 2.7b). Most of the rise in the public
            expenditure was coming from the safety net to the pensioners through the minimum pension and the rise
            in public sector pensions. (12) Since 1996, expenditures in old age pensions have doubled going from 5%
            to 12% of GDP. Over-employment in the public sector was also at the source of the problem, including in
            the education sector, security forces, and in lower qualification positions. Moreover, the public
            remuneration system was inconsistent with the skills and responsibility levels across public sub-sectors
            and profiles. (13) There also was a lack of control and efficiency of expenditure in the healthcare sector.

            Costs linked to Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and SOEs were weighing heavily on present and
            future public finances. Over time, Portugal had engaged into one of the largest PPP programs in the
            world, mainly to finance investments in infrastructure such as roads or hospitals. (14) The Portuguese
            SOE sector was very large, controlled by different players (State, regional and local governments), loss
            making, and hence contributing to an increase in Portuguese public debt through one-off recapitalisation
            measures and subsidies.




            (11) Taking into account the data as updated by the Eurostat, including retroactively. See also footnote 3.
            (12) Reis, R. (2013)
            (13) DG ECFIN (2012c), IMF (2013a), Mercer (2013). See also Giordano, R. et al. (2011) and De Castro, F. et al. (2013).
            (14) IMF (2011a)




30
                                                                                      2. Weak growth and rising debt: an accident waiting to happen




        Graph 2.7a: General Government deficit and                           Graph 2.7b: General Government - Total
                     debt (% of GDP)                                             revenue/expenditure (ESA2010)
                                                                       55 % GDP
 130                                                             9

 110                                                             6
                                                                       50
                                                                 3
  90
                                                                 0
                                                                       45
  70                                                             -3
                                                                 -6
  50                                                                   40
                                                                 -9
  30                                                             -12
       1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011                    35
                                                                            00   01    02   03   04   05   06   07   08   09   10   11   12

             Budget Balance (rhs)      Gross public debt (lhs)                   PT - Total Revenue                   EA - Total Revenue
                                                                                 PT - Total Expenditure               EA - Total Expenditure

                                                                       Source: European Commission
        Source: European Commission (AMECO), OECD.



Since joining the euro area, Portugal's public debt had also been steadily increasing. High budget
deficits and low economic growth put the debt-to-GDP ratio on a steadily increasing path since the
beginning of the decade. The government debt-to-GDP ratio, which was below 60% in 2003, increased by
45 pp between 1999 and 2010, reaching 96% of GDP (Graph 2.7a). Reflecting the smaller pool of private
sector savings, the share of foreign holders of sovereign debt was structurally high and increasing,
reaching 75% in mid-2009.

The consistent budget deficits over the years contributed to further build up macroeconomic
imbalances. In the context of the creation of the monetary union, monetary policy tools are not available
to help the economy adjust to domestic shocks so it is fiscal policy that has to stabilize the economy.
However, Portugal chose to run large fiscal deficits pursuing a pro-cyclical fiscal policy (Graph 2.7a). As
for long-term growth, while some attempts or plans for structural reforms were made in the areas of
health care, public pensions in the years prior to the crisis, they did not prove to be effective or sufficient
in the medium-term, leaving the economy structurally weak.


2.3.     SURVEILLANCE FAILED TO TRIGGER THE CORRECTION OF EXTERNAL IMBALANCES

After the start of the EMU, surveillance did not focus on competitiveness. Current account
developments, external imbalances and underlying factors were not at the core of surveillance. Prior
to the EMU, competitiveness was perceived as a policy priority in view of the possibility of (potentially
costly) nominal exchange rate realignments. Inside the euro area, up to the crisis, surveillance priorities
shifted towards the sustainability of public finances. The attention to intra-area inflation differentials, real
exchange rates and current accounts declined as pressure on exchange rates and risk premiums faded
away. Due to persistent wage and price rigidities, in some cases the necessary intra-area movements in
competitiveness positions were slow, with the building up of high external deficit or surplus positions
implying large adjustment costs. (15) In the case of Portugal, persistent current account deficits combined
with a lack of competitiveness resulted in increasing foreign indebtedness and a limited ability to pay
back the debt. Also convergence of lower income countries towards higher income ones was expected to
be facilitated by the intra-EA transfers, mainly through EU funds. However, the inflow of structural funds
alone (even if reaching 1.5-2% of GDP) and the convergence of interest rates were not enough to promote
convergence of Portugal in terms of GDP per capita (Graph 2.3b).



(15) DG ECFIN (2008a)




                                                                                                                                                 31
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            The EU surveillance was mainly geared to monitoring the fiscal position of the Member States. In
            Portugal, it failed to ensure the necessary adjustment. Portugal was nearly constantly under the
            Excessive Deficits Procedure (EDP) from 2002 until the onset of the crisis, as its attempts to correct its
            deficit were centred on one-off measures. The SGP requirements were not effective in leading Portugal to
            a more balanced fiscal position in a timely manner. Prior to the crisis, the EU surveillance relied
            extensively on the Commission's macroeconomic forecasts and Member States' intentions to stabilise
            their fiscal position. However, in the case of Portugal, the outturn of the economic activity was
            systemically below forecasts and some under-budgeting of public expenditure was observed. The EU also
            lacked full information to properly monitor debt developments: part of the debt increase was not
            explained by budget deficit or GDP growth, likely attributable to SOE support through capital injections
            and other one-off measures.

            At the EU level, there was no mechanism to enforce the implementation of structural reforms. In
            the absence of strong and forceful surveillance mechanisms with respect to macro-economic imbalances,
            EMU in its first years might have weakened the incentives to undertake structural reforms because intra-
            area competitiveness weaknesses no longer led to pressure on exchange rates and risk premia. (16) The
            broad economic policy guidelines lacked "carrots and sticks" and ownership of the recommendations at
            the Member State level was limited. (17)

            External surveillance was pointing to the weak productivity in the Portuguese economy, but
            concrete advice for reform remained limited and was not taken up by the Portuguese authorities.
            The IMF underlined the weak productivity and loss of the competitiveness by the Portuguese economy.
            However, it did not see the high risks associated with the high leverage of the banking system and
            expected that gradual readjustment would be sufficient. (18) The policy advice offered to increase the
            productivity of the economy was not precise in identifying the necessary measures. In 2008, the OECD
            was also pointing to the weak productivity of the Portuguese economy as the main culprit of its low
            growth. It recommended broader reforms than the IMF, mainly in the education, network industries and
            the services sectors, and to employment protection legislation, public employment conditions and tax
            system. The Portuguese authorities at the time recognized only partially the underlying problems so the
            agenda for reforms was delayed and progress remained limited (see Section 5).


            2.4.    THE GLOBAL CRISIS AND THE RUN UP TO THE PROGRAMME

            In 2008, the resilience of the economy proved elusive and gave way to a rapid deterioration. The
            Portuguese GDP continued increasing, although by only 0.2% in 2008, but it contracted by 3% in 2009.
            The weak economy and the steep increase in unemployment, coupled with a countercyclical fiscal stance,
            spilled into large government deficits, of about 10% of GDP in 2009 and 2010, up from 3.8% in 2008.

            In the context of the sovereign crisis, triggered by concerns about the Greek fiscal position, the
            Portuguese sovereign financing costs increased sharply. In December 2009, the EU Council
            recommended Portugal to bring an end to the situation of excessive deficit by 2013. In 2010, Portugal
            passed fiscal consolidation measures with the aim of bringing the deficit for that year down to 7.3%.
            From late 2009, fears of sovereign defaults in other European states developed among the investors. In
            the first few weeks of 2010, there was renewed anxiety about excessive national debt, in case of Portugal,
            compounded by poor prospects of growth, with lenders demanding ever-higher interest rates (Graph 2.8)
            from several countries with higher public debt levels, public deficits, and current account deficits. The
            downgrades of the Portuguese sovereign by the credit agencies followed, in March by Fitch and in April
            2010 by Standard and Poor's.


            (16) DG ECFIN (2008a)
            (17) Deroose, S et al (2008).
            (18) Similarly to the EU, the IMF considered that the Portuguese banking system remained sound and well supervised.




32
                                                                                         2. Weak growth and rising debt: an accident waiting to happen




                                                       Graph 2.8: Financial market distress




                                                                                                                                                  PT programme
                                                                                                                                DE-FR Deauville




                                                                                                                                                  market bet on
               spread vs.




                                                                                                                                   programme
  1200         Bund (bps)




                                                                                                  programme

                                                                                                              EBA stress test
                                                   EL - 10y




                                                                                                                                    summit
                            Lehman failure




                                                                                                                                      Irish
                                                                                                     Greek
                                                   IE - 10y
  1000
                                                   PT - 10y
                                                   ES - 10y
   800
                                                   IT - 10y
                                                   BE - 10y
   600
                                                   FR - 10y

   400

   200

       0
           Sep-08




           Feb-09




           Sep-09




           Feb-10




           Sep-10




           Feb-11
           May-08




           Mar-09

           May-09




           Mar-10

           May-10




           Mar-11
           Apr-08

            Jun-08




           Oct-08

           Dec-08




           Apr-09

            Jun-09




           Oct-09

           Dec-09




           Apr-10

            Jun-10




           Oct-10

           Dec-10




           Apr-11
             Jul-08




             Jul-09




             Jul-10
            Jan-09




            Jan-10




            Jan-11
           Aug-08



           Nov-08




           Aug-09



           Nov-09




           Aug-10



           Nov-10
 Sources: European Commission; Bloomberg



The international financial crisis triggered only a marginal adjustment of existing imbalances. In
2010, Portugal's GDP surprisingly grew at a rate of 1.9%. Along with strong export growth, this positive
growth performance was due to exceptional factors that boosted private consumption, namely the
anticipatory effects of the VAT increases in January 2011 and the relatively low inflation due to falling
energy prices. However, the current account deficit remained at high level of 10% of GDP in 2010: while
corporate net external borrowing decreased sharply compared to 2008 the public net external borrowing
increased keeping current account deficit at high level.

           % Graph 2.9a: Loan to Deposit ratio in EA in 2010                       350    % of     Graph 2.9b: Private debt in EA in 2010
 160                                                                                      GDP
                                                                                   300
 140

 120                                                                               250

 100                                                                               200
  80
                                                                                   150
  60
                                                                                   100
  40

  20                                                                                50

   0                                                                                 0
                                                                                         EL



                                                                                         EE




                                                                                         ES

                                                                                         PT
       LU




       LV




                                                                                         SK
                                                                                         LV




                                                                                         FR




                                                                                         LU
                                                                                          SI




                                                                                          FI
       MT

       EL
       DE
       AT
       NL
       FR
       LT

        IT
       EE
       PT
       SP
        IE




                                                                                         DE

                                                                                          IT



                                                                                         BE

                                                                                         AT

                                                                                         MT

                                                                                         NL



                                                                                          IE
       SK




                                                                                         CY
        SI
       BE
       CY




 Source: ECB                                                                        Source: ECB


The apparent resilience of the Portuguese banks until 2010 to the crisis was the result of the slow
adjustment of the country's macro imbalances. In the initial stages of the crisis, state recapitalisation
was not needed, with the exception of a few smaller banks in the context of their operational and business
model failures. (19) The return on equity remained positive for all major Portuguese banks until 2010.
The need for price adjustment of real estate related loans and securities appeared initially marginal and
negative repercussions for banks' balance sheets and household wealth remained limited. (20) However,
since the banks had significantly contributed to finance the country's debt (as also reflected in their high
LTD ratio), they were not shielded from the imbalances' correction (Graphs 2.9a, 2.9b and Table 2.1).




(19) Notably, Banco Português de Negócio (BPN) and Banco Privado Português (BPP), respectively in November 2008 and July
     2009.
(20) Pereira, P.T., Wemans L. (2012)




                                                                                                                                                                  33
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




             Table 2.1:
                 2010: Banks in a snapshot               CGD               BES               BCP                BPI               Banif
              Total Assets ( €bn)                        126               106                98                 45                12
             Core Tier 1 (%)                              8.8               7.9               6.7               8.7                n.a.
              ROE (%)                                     5.0               8.6               6.1               8.8                5.2
             Source: Banks' Annual Reports


            The deterioration of confidence and rating downgrades increased pressure on the funding
            conditions of the Portuguese banking system. The perceived risk of the Portuguese sovereign and that
            of the Portuguese banking system were closely related, as measured by the correlation of the respective
            credit-default swap rates (see Graph 2.10a). Since mid-2010, the banking sector's international market
            access was virtually shut down. This fostered an initial correction of banks' LTD ratio from the 167%
            peak recorded in mid-2010. (21) The full allotment by the ECB and the availability of eligible collateral
            allowed avoiding access to Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) and a sudden liquidity
            squeeze. However, this situation would have been hardly sustainable over the medium-term, especially in
            light of the forthcoming roll-over needs (€30 billion alone for the five biggest banks in 2010-13,
            according to Bloomberg).

            In March 2011, the Portuguese parliament rejected the Stability Programme, prepared by the
            government to strengthen the fiscal position, triggering the need for external financial assistance. In
            February 2011, in the context of increasing volatility in the euro area and the Greek and Irish adjustment
            programmes, the European Council called on Member States to make progress in strengthening their
            fiscal position and growth prospects. In light of a macroeconomic scenario that was turning worse than
            the projections underlying the 2011 budget, the Portuguese government prepared a Stability programme
            to cover the gap. The Programme targeted a reduction of the deficit from above 8% of GDP (net of one-
            offs) to 4.6% in 2011 and 3 and 2% in 2012 and 2013, respectively. On the 23rd of March 2011, the
            Portuguese Parliament rejected the Stability programme. The government resigned.

            The uncertainty over the macroeconomic outlook, dynamics of public debt and the disappointing
            fiscal performance in 2010 accelerated the increase of the government bonds' yields up to
            unsustainable levels. At the end of March 2011, the Portuguese statistics institute revised upwards the
            previous years’ figures for budget deficits and public debt, mainly to reflect the reclassification of a
            number of public transport SOEs in the general government (22) (INE, 2011a). This meant an upward
            revision of the 2010 public debt of about 10 pp, from 83% to 92.4% of GDP, and implied that the 2010
            deficit target had been missed (23) (see Graph 2.10b and Section 4). In the end, despite the consolidation
            measures, the 2010 deficit was still at 10% of GDP. Weaknesses in reporting and management of the
            risks from SOEs and PPPs were adding to the uncertainty caused by the sheer size of these sectors.
            Compounded by the systemic risk aversion at the time (24), this uncertainty about the Portuguese public
            finances contributed to the spike of government bonds' yields (Graph 2.8).




            (21) BdP data, as reported by Programme documents. See ECFIN (2011b)
            (22) This followed Eurostat guidance on financial defeasance structures and guidelines on administrative public sector budgetary
                 perimeter.
            (23) Taking into account revisions that occurred later in April and September 2011 (INE 2011b, 2011c), the missed deficit target in
                 2010 is mainly explained by reclassification of a number of SOEs and PPPs into the general government and other one-offs
                 related to banks rescue and Madeira's unreported debt.
             24
            ( ) Between 24 March and 4 April, rating agencies plunged Portugal’s rating, including because of a negative interpretation of the
                 24–25 March European Council conclusions that “sovereign debt restructuring is a potential pre-condition to borrowing from
                 the ESM”.




34
                                                                                                                                                         2. Weak growth and rising debt: an accident waiting to happen




                                                        Graph 2.10a: Portugal - CDS 5 Yr
1400            basis points                                                                                             basis points            1400                  Graph 2.10b: General Government debt
                                                                                                                                                        110        % GDP
1200                                                                                                                                             1200
                                                                                                                                                        105
1000                                                                                                                                             1000   100
                                                                                                                                                         95
 800                                                                                                                                             800
                                                                                                                                                         90
 600                                                                                                                                             600     85
                                                                                                                                                         80
 400                                                                                                                                             400     75
                                                                                                                                                         70
 200                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                                                                         65
   0                                                                                                                                             0       60
                                                                                                                                                              08                09                10       11                 12
       Jul 08

                    Oct 08

                             Jan 09

                                      Apr 09

                                               Jul 09

                                                           Oct 09

                                                                    Jan 10

                                                                                Apr 10

                                                                                         Jul 10

                                                                                                   Oct 10

                                                                                                            Jan 11

                                                                                                                     Apr 11

                                                                                                                              Jul 11

                                                                                                                                        Oct 11
                                                                                                                                                                           Forecast 2010 Autumn        Forecast 2011 Spring
                                                              Sovereign (lhs)                 Banks (rhs)
 Source: Bloomberg
                                                                                                                                                        Source: European Commission




On the 7th of April 2011, Portugal requested financial assistance from the EFSM/EFSF and the
IMF. Negotiations between the caretaker government and the programme partners resulted in an
agreement at technical level in early May 2011. Prior to the mission that started on the 11th of April,
there was some contact between the programme partners (the European Commission, the IMF and the
ECB), but they were not extensive. The negotiations on the Economic Adjustment Programme took place
in a cooperative environment in consultation with the main opposition parties and other civil society
partners. The Programme received public support from the then main opposition parties which suggested
a broadly-based political ownership of the programme at its inception and a commitment to sound
implementation. The programme was agreed at technical level on the 3rd of May and the Ministers
endorsed it at the ECOFIN/Eurogroup meeting of the 16th of May 2011 (25). The signature of the Letter
of Intent of the Portuguese authorities - accompanied by the MEFP and Technical Memorandum of
Understanding (TMU) – and of the MoU (detailing the programme conditionality) followed during the
same month. Portugal established promptly a special unit (ESAME), which reported to the Prime
Minister, with the task of monitoring the implementation of the programme, in liaison with the line
Ministers.

Over a three-year period, the programme aimed at supporting progress in the orderly unwinding of
the public and private, internal and external imbalances and in increasing the growth potential,
while mitigating negative social impacts.




(25) Statement by the Eurogroup and ECOFIN Ministers on the 16th of May 2011, www.consilium.europa.eu




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   35
3.             FINANCING NEEDS

In May 2011, the EFSF, the EFSM and the IMF agreed on a €78bn financing envelope to cover the
financing needs of Portugal over a three years period, until June 2014. This funding envelope was
deemed sufficient to cover over the three years period the projected government cash deficit, maturing
public debt, the potential recapitalisation of the banking sector and possible contingent public-sector
liabilities. The financing envelope was calculated based on the assumption that Portugal would continue
rolling over part of its existing stock of short-term debt and slowly return to longer-term bond markets
during the last part of the programme. Overall, the financial envelope corresponded to approximately
44% of Portuguese GDP.

The financial support was to be equally granted by the three institutions according to broadly
similar terms; however changes during the programme led to substantial differences between the
lending terms of the EU lenders and the IMF. The programme consisted of €52bn EU funding, split
equally between the EFSF and the EFSM and €26bn from the IMF. All loans were to be disbursed over
three years. The EFSM and EFSF lending terms were expected to be broadly similar to the IMF ones.
However, as always, IMF financing was provided in Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), hence the amount
to be paid back entailed some exchange rate risks. In the Portuguese programme case, exchange rate
fluctuations added some €1.4bn to the value of the IMF loans over the course of the programme. More
substantially, the terms of the EFSM and EFSF loans were changed twice during the programme,
reducing the interest rate and extending the maximum weighted average maturities (up to 19.5 years for
the EFSM and 20.8 years for the EFSF). This resulted in the EU loans being provided at substantially
better terms than those of the IMF.


3.1.    PROGRAMME STRATEGY

The amount of financial assistance was set to cover the estimated funding gap over the programme.
These financing gap calculations were based on estimates of gross financing needs and sources as of May
2011. On the basis of macroeconomic and fiscal projections, estimates of gross financing needs amounted
to €130.2bn. The main items included the amortisation of government debt, the cumulative state deficits
and remaining needs of the wider public-sector and support for the recapitalisation of the banking sector.
On the resources side, Portugal's own financing sources were estimated to amount to €52.2bn, based on
assumptions about continued reliance on issuing debt in short-term markets, a gradual resumption of
access to long-term debt markets over the programme horizon and privatisation receipts. The external
assistance covered the resulting funding gap, which included an implicit contingency buffer to provide for
unexpected deviations from the baseline financing scenario - for example, possible difficulties in rolling-
over part of the short-term debt.

The most significant element of Portugal's gross financing needs during the programme horizon
related to its maturing public debt. At the end of 2010, Portugal's gross debt stood at €162bn,
corresponding to some 93.3% of GDP (26), the fifth highest level of gross public debt in the EU. It also
had a debt structure that was skewed to the short term (at the end of 2010, 12.7% of the debt consisted of
T-bills (27)), resulting in very high financing needs just to keep rolling the debt over. Moreover, T-bills
were largely held by foreigners, reflecting the high external indebtedness of the country. This debt
structure was a major reason why Portugal had a weak position in sovereign debt markets and was unable
to withstand market pressure once market rates started to increase significantly in 2011. In the three years
from June 2011, Portugal was forecast to need €41.1bn for the amortisation of T-bills (28) and €38.2bn to
amortise maturing long term debt. Repo operations added an additional €1.9bn to its needs and net
redemptions of non-traded debt €2.1bn.


(26) ESA-95 figures.
(27) IGCP. Relatório Annual de Gestão de Tesouraria de Estado e da Dívida Pública. 2011
(28) Gross figures, i.e. including rollover of T-bills raised during the programme period.




                                                                                                               37
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            The forecast cumulative fiscal deficits contributed €22bn to the expected financing needs over the
            programme. The estimates were based on the delivery of the agreed fiscal consolidation path which
            would reduce the deficit so as to meet the EDP headline target of a 3% deficit by 2013.

            The programme envelope also contained €12.9bn of expected financing needs for other areas of the
            public sector, including the clearance of arrears. Portugal had a large and complicated web of SOEs,
            many of which were loss-making, highly indebted and ultimately to be covered by the state. The initial
            programme did not include the debt of SOEs in the programme financing envelope as it was argued that
            the restructuring of the companies to achieve operational balance should take place first and state aid
            arguments might be at stake. Overall, although a number of these companies had been reclassified into
            the general government, the total needs of these companies were open to large uncertainties. The
            financing of the autonomous regions of Madeira and Azores was not fully transparent. In addition, the
            Portuguese government's reluctance to ask for financing earlier, had led to an accumulation of arrears
            which acted as a brake on economic growth. Most financing needs for these items were concentrated in
            the first six months of the programme, due both to the need to clear arrears as quickly as possible and to
            the expectation that some of the SOEs would be restructured and/or privatised under the programme.

            The programme envelope included €12bn earmarked to meet potential recapitalisation needs for
            the banking sector. This estimate was set to ensure that financing would be sufficient to meet the worst
            case scenario (i.e. providing some kind of buffer in the programme), but at the same time the uncertainty
            of both the needs of the financial sector and their evolution meant significant risk as to whether this
            funding would be sufficient. The €12bn was earmarked in the Bank Solvency Support Facility (BSSF) so
            that it would not be available to the Portuguese authorities for other purposes. This choice reflected the
            necessity to avoid watering down the incentives to pursue reforms because of over-financing.

            The financial envelope calculations assumed that Portugal would continue to roll-over part of its
            short term debt and gradually return to the longer term debt markets. Over the programme period,
            Portugal was expected to roll over its T-bills, hence keeping the Portuguese sovereign in the markets.
            However, given the large stock of short-term debt, the fact that it was largely held by foreigners and the
            initial limited access to the markets, refinancing of T-bills was not guaranteed and the programme
            initially projected an overall reduction of the stock of T-bills (to be covered by the financing envelope).
            The conservative assumption taken when designing the programme was that at the beginning Portugal
            would only rollover 50% of maturing T-bills, while later on the rollover rate would reach 100%.
            Furthermore, Portugal was expected to return to longer terms markets before the end of the programme,
            to ease the transition back to market financing. Overall, Portugal was expected to add €16bn to its coffers
            from medium and long-term borrowing starting from the second half of 2013 (100% rollover rate as from
            that date). Further to market access, the planned financing resources included around €5bn from
            privatisations, indicating the somewhat limited role of privatisation receipts for funding the programme in
            the initial programme design. The initial calculations of financing needs did not contain projections on
            cash balance developments or a target cash buffer by the end of the programme.

            The disbursement of the financial assistance was expected to be heavily frontloaded, with around
            2/3 of it to be disbursed in the first half of the programme. The largest financing needs were expected
            to occur at the start of the programme and at the same time, the return to the markets was assumed to
            gradually increase towards the end of the programme. The agreed disbursement schedule was deemed to
            strike an appropriate balance between covering the financing needs in the short-term while keeping
            incentives for Portugal to continue participating in debt markets and ensuring implementation of
            structural reforms.

            The initial conditions of the EFSM/EFSF loans were set up to be broadly equivalent to the IMF
            loans, with short maturities and mark-ups for risks on the interest rates. Under the original
            programme, the EFSM and EFSF loans were set up to be broadly equivalent to the terms of the IMF
            loans, with margins of over 200bps and maximum weighted average maturities around 7.5 years. EU



38
                                                                                                                           3. Financing needs




lending was to be provided through fixed bullet loans, set according to financial markets' conditions at the
time of EFSM and EFSF borrowing. The IMF loans had an average maturity of 7.25 years and were
based on the floating SDR interest rate plus a basic service charge of 100 basis points and a surcharge that
rose to 300 basis points on the amount of outstanding credit in excess of 300% of quota for a consecutive
period of three years (29). The effective costs of IMF loans could be substantially higher than the lending
rates, as these loans are denominated in SDR and carry variable interest charges. Portugal was therefore
exposed to both interest rate and exchange rate risk for the IMF lending. Taking these factors into
account, it was assumed that the effective IMF lending rate to Portugal was around 5.5%, once expressed
in financially equivalent terms. (30) Simulations at the time of the programme based on market rates at the
end of April 2011 suggested that the EFSM and EFSF loans to Portugal would have effective interest
rates of about 5.4% and 5.7% respectively.

The EFSM/EFSF margins were cancelled and the maturities of these loans were extended twice
during the programme. In October 2011, following decisions in the context of the Greek Loan Facility,
the Council decided to cancel EFSM margins to programme countries and similar conditions were applied
to EFSF loans (31), making all loans under these facilities considerably cheaper. The reduction in margin
would apply not just to future instalments, but also to those that had already been disbursed. In addition,
the maturities of the EFSM/EFSF loans to Portugal were extended twice, along with those of Ireland, in
2011 and 2013. The October 2011 extension of the maximum weighted average maturity added about 5
years in the case of the EFSM loans and about 6.3 years for the EFSF loans, while the 2013 extension
added 7 further years, taking it to up to 19.5 years for EFSM loans and to up to 20.8 years for EFSF.(32)


3.2.    OUTTURN AND POST-PROGRAMME DEVELOPMENTS

Portugal had access to much more market financing during the programme than assumed under
the initial calculations. Short-term markets remained accessible during the whole programme period and
Portugal was able to raise more funds than assumed in the programme design: by the end, the overall
short-term debt rollover rate reached 100% for the whole programme. Domestic banks bought more T-
bills than expected, in a context of relatively easy Eurosystem refinancing conditions (see later). As
regards the medium and long-term debt markets, Portugal was able to issue a 5 and a 10 year bond in
2013 and made a more extensive return to the markets in early 2014. Overall, over the programme period,
Portugal was able to access €47.8bn more than initially planned by increased borrowing (€37.5bn in short
term borrowing and €8.1bn in long-term borrowing). This additional borrowing was not a net gain to the
financing available to the Treasury as it also increased the amortisation needs, in particular for the short-
term borrowing – a high share of this was to be rolled over during the programme. Taking this into
account, the increased access to the market provided the Portuguese Treasury with about €14bn extra net
funding over the programme period – just under €10bn from the T-bills and €2bn each from long term
borrowing and other sources. Furthermore, the government benefited from other flows such as cash
balances of public entities held in the Single Treasure Account and from repayments of BSSF funds
ahead of schedule. At the end of 2013 the weight of the T-bills in total debt had been reduced to 9,3% and
by the end of 2014 it had gone down to 7,5%. (33)




(29) The 300 basis point surcharge has been applied since May 2014. At the end of the programme Portugal faced an interest rate on
     IMF credit of 4.8%.
(30) Effective interest rate calculated based on IMF SDR floating rates being swapped into fixed rates in euro with 7.5 year
     durations.
(31) The EFSF lending rate includes the EFSF borrowing rate plus an annual guarantee commitment fee of 10 basis points of the
     loan amount. This fee is not retained by the EFSF but passed on to the Guarantors.
(32) http://www.efsf.europa.eu/mediacentre/news/2013/efsf-extends-loan-maturities-for-ireland-and-portugal-.htm
(33) IGCP, Relatório Annual de Gestão de Tesouraria de Estado e da Dívida Pública. 2014.




                                                                                                                                           39
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                          Graph 3.1a: PLAN - Use of funds, June 2011 - June 2014,
                                                                                                                                    Graph 3.1b: PLAN - Sources of funding, June 2011 - June 2014,
                                                       EUR bn and % of total Funds
                                                                                                                                                  EUR bn and % of total Sources
                     Other public sector                            Cash reserves; 0.0;
                   financing needs; 12.9;                                  0%
                            10%                                                                                                                                                                   Market funding: ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                 and other borrowing ;
                                                                                      Cash deficit; 22; 17%                                                                                           31.2; 24%

                                                                                                                                                               IMF; 26; 20%
                      Bank solvency
                   mechanism and other
                   banking expenditure;
                         12; 9%
                                                                                                                                                        EFSM; 26; 20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Market funding: LT
                                                                                           LT debt redemptions;
                                                                                                                                                                                                        borrowing ; 16; 12%
                                                                                                38,2; 29%
                         ST debt redemptions,
                          repo and non-traded                                                                                                                            EFSF; 26; 20%
                            debt; 45,1; 35%                                                                                                                                                         Privatisation receipts;
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5; 4%
                   Source: EC own calculations                                                                          Source: EC own calculations



                                      Graph 3.1c: OUTTURN - Use of funds, June 2011 - June 2014,                                    Graph 3.1d: OUTTURN - Sources of funding, June 2011 - June 2014,
                                                    EUR bn and % of total Funds                                                                     EUR bn and % of total Sources
                                                     Cash reserves; 15.6;
                                 Other public sector         9%                 Cash deficit; 26.9;
                               financing needs; 15.4;                                 15%                                                                                                         Market funding: ST
                                        8%                                                                                                                                                       and other borrowing ;
                                                                                                                                                                 IMF; 26.4; 15%                       70.9; 39%
                        Bank solvency
                     mechanism and other
                     banking expenditure;
                           9.5; 5%
                                                                                                                                                        EFSM; 24.1; 13%
                                                                                                 LT debt redemptions;
                                                                                                      44,1; 24%
                                                                                                                                                            EFSF; 26; 14%

                       ST debt redemptions,
                        repo and non-traded
                          debt; 71,2; 39%
                                                                                                                                          Others; 7.3; 4%
                                                                                                                                                                                         Market funding: LT
                                                                                                                                                              Privatisation               borrowing ; 24.1;
               Source: EC own calculations                                                                              Source: EC own calculations         receipts; 4.3; 2%                   13%




            The gross financing needs over the programme period also exceeded initial expectations. Compared
            to the programme initial projections, about €52 bn additional funding was used from June 2011 to June
            2014. This came predominantly (two thirds) from the ST debt redemptions, due to more than projected
            roll-over, and special operations (e.g. buybacks) on LT debt. Furthermore, the cumulative government
            cash deficits were €4.9 bn higher than initially planned, as the deficit targets were revised twice. The
            financing needs of the SOEs, the autonomous regions of Madeira and Azores and the settlement of arrears
            were overall €2.5bn higher than forecast. Banking sector support outside of the BSSF scope (34), which
            had not been planned for, amounted to €3.9 bn for the recapitalisation of the CGD and the resolution of
            the BPN, two public sector institutions. The full €12bn included for the bank solvency mechanism was
            transferred to the dedicated account at the BdP, although by the end of the programme only €5.6bn had
            been used. The remaining €6.4bn stayed in the BSSF and remained available for bank recapitalisations
            after the end of the programme. (see Graphs 3.1.a and 3.1.c) €3.9bn was lent to the Resolution Fund and
            used to finance the capitalisation of Novo Banco in August 2014, in the context of the resolution measure
            applied to Banco Espírito Santo.

            Portugal was also able to build up a robust cash buffer during the programme, which strengthened
            its financing position to face any short term financing challenges. By the end of the programme, the
            increased market financing, net of the increased needs, allowed Portugal to build up a sizeable cash buffer
            of €15.6 bn. This was more than the remaining deficit being projected in mid-2014 for the remainder of
            2014 and 2015, put together. It meant that as long as Portugal was able to keep rolling its maturing debt
            over, it would be able to finance itself until at least the end of 2015 without additional market access, in
            case market pressures reappeared. Although there was no explicit cash buffer target in the early
            programme documents, the gradual build-up of the cash buffer was increasingly targeted by the
            programme partners which sought a prefunding of upcoming needs for at least a 12 months horizon. This
            was to provide reassurance to the financial markets that the country would be able to meet its forthcoming




            (34) The BSSF could not recapitalise some banks due to their public ownership.




40
                                                                                                                  3. Financing needs




obligations. Overall, the sizeable cash buffer allowed investors to be confident in the ability of Portugal to
withstand market volatility without funding pressure, which in turn eased market access. (35)

The comfortable position that the cash buffer left Portugal in was by no means a given over the
early years of the programme, when the financing situation was rather tight. Although Portugal
seemingly built up a cash buffer from 2011, this was partly due to delays to cover certain expenditure
items. In the early months of the programme there were delays in clearing expenditures linked to the
SOEs, since these needs were not rapidly identified. There were also funds held under BSSF which
technically formed part of the cash buffer, but were earmarked for the banking sector where payments
were below those set out in the financing plan during the programme years. Once the funds earmarked
under the BSSF are set aside and the delays in the SOEs accounted for, the evolution of the cash buffer is
more gradual and primarily driven by the increase in the T-bill issuance. Furthermore, in the early years
of the programme, the higher-than-expected government deficits created higher short-term financing
needs and by tapping short-term debt markets more than initially planned, Portugal compensated for some
underfinancing of the programme. Without this additional market funding, the financing situation would
have been much tighter during the programme years.

Portugal exited its financial assistance programme in June 2014, without accessing the last €2.5 bn
of programme financing. In the run-up to the end of the programme, the government chose to delay
further fiscal measures until the Constitutional Court had delivered its verdicts about the legality of some
consolidation measures, expected in the summer 2014. At the same time, it decided not to request an
extension and to let the programme lapse without formal conclusion of the last review and without
disbursement of the last tranche of the assistance. The existing cash buffer towards the end of the
programme allowed the Portuguese government to take this decision, as it not only ensured that it could
cover its financing needs, but it also reassured markets that it would continue to be able to do so.

Portugal returned to the long-term bond markets during the programme and has since built a good
track record of market access. Portugal did a bond exchange in October 2012 to extend the maturity,
and returned to markets properly in 2013 issuing a 5 year and 10 year bond at yields of 4.89% and 5.67%
respectively. Portugal reached the end of its programme when market conditions were favourable, and EU
policy-making had reinforced the euro area's ability to deal with support of its economies during difficult
times. The setting up of the ESM, the announcement of "quantitative easing" and purchase effects (36) and
rising investor risk appetite pushed sovereign yields to record lows in the post-programme period. Over
the course of 2014 and 2015, Portugal was able to issue 10 year bonds at interest rates falling to a 2.3%
minimum. In 2015, the interest rates of 2-year bonds reached historical low in secondary market and 6-
months T-bills even recorded negative yields.

In 2015, Portugal started to repay its IMF loans early, improving its debt sustainability by
refinancing it at cheaper market rates. The improvement in the EFSM/EFSF loans terms was not
accompanied by changes to the IMF loans, making them relatively cheaper. The EFSM/EFSF financial
assistance framework agreement included a proportionate early repayment clause (the so called pari
passu clause) requiring that all creditors be repaid proportionately in the case of early repayment. By
early 2015, the general fall in euro area bond yields and in particular, the near historic lows in Portuguese
yields, as the market recognised the implementation of reforms coupled with the role of other global and
pan-European factors, reduced Portugal's borrowing costs to below those of its IMF loans. It was in
Portugal's interest to partially repay the IMF early. In February 2015, the Eurogroup agreed to waive the
pari passu clause and allowed Portugal to repay up to SDR 11.5 bn (€14.4bn at the end of Feb-2015) of
its SDR 22.9 bn (€28.7 bn at the end of Feb-2015) IMF loans ahead of schedule over the next 2½ years,



(35) Stakeholder consultation
(36) According to ECB data (March 31, 2016), thanks to the public sector purchase program (PSPP) the ECB was able to buy
     €14,8bn worth of Portuguese bonds, with 10.18 years average maturity.




                                                                                                                                  41
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            without an equivalent early repayment of its EFSM/EFSF loans. Portugal made early repayments to the
            IMF in 2015 totalling SDR 6.6 bn (€8.4 bn at the reimbursement dates).


            3.3.    ASSESSMENT OF THE PROGRAMME FINANCING

            Overall, the programme financing envelope was sufficient to meet the financing gap during the
            programme, but only because the increased access to market funding and other funding sources
            covered the higher financing requirements, especially in the early years. The size of the Portuguese
            programme financing envelope proved sufficient to cover the country's needs and there was no need to
            top it up in the course of the programme. On the contrary, even the disbursed programme funds were
            smaller than initially planned and a cash buffer, surprisingly not explicitly targeted in the initial
            projections, could be built up. However, without the additional unforeseen market access, Portugal would
            have struggled to stay within the financial envelope set out in the programme. This is particularly the case
            in the early years when there was considerable uncertainty about whether the financial envelope would be
            sufficient in light of the much higher fiscal deficits than initially foreseen. The complex needs of the
            wider public sector remained both sizeable and unclear. This indicates that the assessment of risks in the
            initial calculations of the financial envelope may have been on the optimistic side and that the envelope
            did not provide suitable buffers against financing risks. Overall, the Portuguese programme met the
            sovereign financing needs in a dynamic and resilient way to changing circumstances.

            The frontloading of the financing meant that the programme had little leverage over the
            government by the end. In determining the time profile of the disbursements, the risks of underfunding
            need to be balanced against the risks of creating unnecessary cash buffers which can lessen the drive for
            reforms. In the Portuguese case, the government was able to bypass the final tranche as the frontloaded
            disbursements and return to market access allowed the cash buffer to be built up, which contributed to
            slow some of the reforms. This left Portugal's underlying fiscal position weaker than ideal at programme
            exit. It also probably contributed to a weakening of the reform effort in the structural field, where
            implementation fell short of addressing the deep rooted challenges in Portugal's economy.

            Despite the premature ending of the programme, it is difficult to argue that a less front-loaded
            disbursement schedule was a plausible alternative. Portugal was able to decline the last disbursement
            and to return successfully to the financing markets in better conditions than expected, in part due to
            changes in monetary conditions which could not be predicted and which were outside the control of the
            government. Until the second half of the programme, the risks looked like firmly on the side of the
            envelope being too small rather than too large. Reducing the frontloading would have likely led to
            substantial pressure and uncertainty about Portugal's ability to follow the programme. This is particularly
            the case, as the relationship between financing risk and market access is not linear: the presence of any
            doubt can have disproportionate market effects.

            The increased market financing was both a testament to the programme's implementation and the
            result of an easing of market conditions amid policy action by the monetary authorities. The
            adequacy of the financing envelope is contingent on the increased market borrowing that Portugal was
            able to tap. This market borrowing is endogenous to the programme – at least in part. From early 2011
            (see Graph 3.2), bond spreads had started to increase sharply, leading to the financing request. By mid-
            2012, they were falling solidly, with a stronger fall coming after OMT and Mario Draghi's "whatever it
            takes". By early 2013, Portugal's access to market was undertaken under similar conditions to those that
            prevailed before the request for assistance. The improvement in the Portuguese profile was part of a
            general reduction in spreads in the Eurozone periphery. However, it is also a testament to the
            programme's implementation. Portuguese spreads fell more than all the other Eurozone countries except
            Greece, which underwent a debt restructuring. In Portugal's case, this represented renewed market
            confidence in its longer term sustainability.




42
                                                                                                                                           3. Financing needs




Throughout the programme, the liquidity provided by the Eurosystem was crucial. From the
summer of 2010 the banking sector was heavily reliant on Eurosystem refinancing operations as its access
to market liquidity dried up. This remained the case until the second half of 2012, when the reliance on
the Eurosystem started to decrease. With the downgrading of the rating of the Portuguese sovereign, the
eligibility of debt securities issued/guaranteed by the Portuguese Republic was granted by the waiver of
the minimum credit ratings normally applied by the Eurosystem. This allowed the banking sector to
continue using these securities as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations. Throughout the programme
the refinancing through the Eurosystem accommodated the banks' financing needs and was therefore
instrumental to ensure the sufficiency of the original financial envelope. By the end of the programme the
reliance on the Eurosystem was reduced, but the Eurosystem remained an important source of liquidity
for the Portuguese banking system (see Graph 6.2a in Section 6).

                                                         Graph 3.2: Spreads compared to German 10-yr Bund
 16

                ES - 10 yr
 14

 12             IT - 10 yr

 10
                PT- 10 yr

  8
                FR -10 yr
  6

  4

  2

  0
  Jan-09        Jul-09        Jan-10        Jul-10   Jan-11     Jul-11      Jan-12      Jul-12     Jan-13   Jul-13   Jan-14   Jul-14   Jan-15

   Source : European Commssion, Bloomberg




The set-up and operation of both the EFSM and the EFSF represented a major part of the added
value of EU-level intervention. This is demonstrated by the significant spread between the average 10
year yield of the euro area countries' sovereign bonds and the 10 year yield of the bonds issued by the
EFSM and the EFSF (see Graph 3.3b). (37) Tapping financial markets at the EU/EA level rather than
relying on bilateral loans allowed Portugal to benefit from financial assistance at a very low cost once the
interest rate margins were removed. This was possible because the EFSM is guaranteed by the EU
budget, while the EFSF was supported by the explicit, irrevocable and unconditional guarantee of each
Member State to back the issuance for up to 165% of its stake. The two facilities were originally assigned
AAA rating, despite the high market volatility at the time. (38)

Changes to the EFSM/EFSF lending terms aided Portugal's market access, but were made without
strengthening programme conditionality. The changes to the EFSM/EFSF lending terms provided
Portugal with a windfall, by reducing its interest payments and pushing back the point at which the
EFSF/EFSM debt would need to be repaid and/or rolled over. This had a positive impact on its deficit and
on its debt sustainability, aiding its return to the markets. (39) Of possibly even more significance, was the
signalling effect that EU partners were ready to help the government's commitment to implementing the


(37) Average is weighted for the GDP of each country. Smaller countries with a weight less than 1% are not included. Ireland,
     Portugal and Greece are also not included.
(38) EFSF is rated by Moody's, Standard & Poor's and Fitch. Between November 2011 and November 2013, the agencies
     downgraded the credit rating of EFSF to Aa1/AA+, following the downgrades of some EA MS, notably France.
(39) According to the behaviour of various debt market indicators before and after the announcement of the changes in the terms and
     conditions of the loans, these changes had a meaningful impact on debt markets. The ESM 2014 Annual Report shows that both
     after the July 2011 and March 2013 EFSF announcements of the loan changes, the Portuguese yield curve shifted down,
     especially in the shorter maturity. Thus, by providing cheaper and longer-term financing, the changes to the loans provided a
     temporary period of reduced sustainability concerns.




                                                                                                                                                           43
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            programme. (40) Portugal benefited from the better conditions that were negotiated as part of the Greek
            programme and which were extended to other countries too. But it also saw an extension of maturities by
            joining the request by Ireland in 2013 to benefit from better financing conditions due to the strong
            turnaround in its perceived sustainability. This allowed smoothening Portugal's debt redemption profile
            and lowering its refinancing needs in the period subsequent to the economic adjustment programme.
            Portugal benefited from its association with Ireland and its narrative of strong implementation, even if in
            the case of Portugal, the improvement in underlying economic conditions was not as evident.
            Conditioning the improvements in the lending conditions, in particular the second one, might have
            allowed to keep a better hold on government policy and thereby might have underpinned stronger reform
            momentum.

                     Graph 3.3a: Evolution of Portuguese sovereign yield                                  Graph 3.3b: 10-year yields
              10                            curve                          4.5
                    %                                                               %
               9                                                           4.0
               8                                                           3.5
               7
                                                                           3.0
               6
               5                                                           2.5

               4                                                           2.0
               3                                                           1.5
               2
                                                                           1.0
               1                                                                 Jun- Aug- Oct- Dec- Feb- Apr- Jun- Aug- Oct- Jan- Mar-May- Jul- Sep-Nov-
                                                                                  11 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 13 13
               0
                   3 M 6 M 1 Y 2 Y 3 Y 4 Y 5 Y 6 Y 7 Y 8 Y 9 Y 10 Y 15 Y
                                                                                                       Average EA Sovereign - excl. EL, IE, PT
                                   Mar-11       Dec-13         Dec-14
                                                                                                       EFSM
               Source: Bloomberg                                                                       EFSF



            Earmarking the amount available for the banking sector may have increased the incentives for
            Portugal to continue with the programme for as long as it did. In the absence of the earmarking, the
            unused €6.4bn would have been added to the amount of the cash buffer that could be used for general
            financing needs, possibly replacing some programme funds. If the Portuguese government had not felt
            that all this was necessary for the future needs of the banking sector, it would have been given additional
            leeway to decide to end the programme earlier.

            The early repayment of IMF loans is another shift in the gradual differentiation of the roles of the
            IMF and the euro area in providing financing for euro area countries, shifting relative risk to the
            euro area. The interest margins on IMF and originally EFSF/EFSM loans were there to prevent moral
            hazard in the repayment; by making the loans reasonably costly, debtor countries would have the
            incentive to refinance these loans on the open market as soon as possible, rather than holding on to them
            and exposing the creditor organisation to default risk. However, the higher interest rates themselves
            reduce the sustainability of the public finances increasing the risk of default. Over the years of the
            Portuguese and other programmes, there has been a gradual divergence in the approaches taken by the
            IMF and euro area countries. The EFSF/EFSM loans are now set so as to maximise sustainability, subject
            to the creditors not directly subsidising the interest. IMF loans include interest rate margins which, with
            declining yields, make IMF loans increasingly more expensive than market financing. With the de facto
            waiving of the pari passu clause, Portugal was the second country (after Ireland) to set the precedent for
            accepting that euro area/EU (whether through the EFSF/EFSM or ESM) (41) gradually bears more and
            more of the risk associated with euro area assistance in the place of the IMF. These differences are not
            fully aligned with the G20 principles for cooperation between the IMF and regional financing

            (40) Stakeholder consultation.
            (41) ESM lending rates have very small interest margins on top of the cost of funding and operations by the ESM. For detailed
                 information concerning the pricing of ESM stability support instruments, see ‘ESM Pricing Policy’,
                 http://www.esm.europa.eu/pdf/Pricing%20guideline.pdf




44
                                                                                                3. Financing needs




arrangements (42), which foresee consistency of lending conditions to the extent possible, in order to
prevent arbitrage and facility shopping.




(42) As endorsed by G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, 15 October 2011.




                                                                                                                45
4.             FISCAL POLICY


4.1.    KEY CHALLENGES AND PROGRAMME DESIGN

At the beginning of the programme, the fiscal position of Portugal had severely weakened and was
not on a sustainable footing. Since 2009, Portugal was subject to an EDP procedure. Portugal had
expenditure levels roughly in line with the euro area average, but revenues were insufficient to cover such
expenditure levels. In 2010 the budget deficit was still about 10% of GDP, including because of
significant reclassifications of a number of SOEs and PPPs into the general government and other one-
offs related to banks rescue and Madeira's unreported debt. These reclassifications meant an upward
revision of the 2010 public debt of about 10 pp, from 83% to 92.4% of GDP. These developments were
heavily affecting market confidence in Portuguese public finances. SOEs, PPPs and banks were exerting
considerable pressure on the Portuguese public budget.

Many SOEs were structurally loss-makers. The extended use of PPPs shifted the related
expenditure to future years. The SOEs' challenge was multifaceted as they were posing significant risks
that arose from their negative profitability and high cumulated debt and that could not be fully assessed.
The large and inefficient SOEs-sector was substantially feeding into public expenditure. In particular
transport companies and hospitals were a matter of concern. Loss-making SOEs weighed on the public
deficit mainly through intermediate consumption and compensation of employees, when classified within
the general government perimeter, or through subsidies and capital transfers, when classified outside the
general government perimeter and the state was called to cover their losses (see Box 4.1). Moreover, as it
was already happening, economic and financial difficulties of SOEs could lead to the reclassification of
their liabilities as public debt, reflecting increasing risks for the general government. Government's
control over SOEs dynamics, especially at local level, presented significant weaknesses. The use of PPPs
implied that the government could foster growth through investments in infrastructure (such as roads or
hospitals), while moving accounting of related expenditures to future years, when the government has to
pay for the availability of these infrastructures. There was a lack of adequate central control for creating
PPP and weaknesses in the monitoring framework. In Portugal, the present value of this 'additional' future
expenditure was estimated at 7 percent of GDP when the programme started (IMF, 2011a).

Inefficiencies in public expenditure affected a number of key areas. Over-employment was a cause of
concern in the education sector and security forces. (43) Overall, most of the government workforce had at
most secondary education qualifications. Furthermore, public wages were higher than in the private
sector, especially for workers with lower qualifications.(44) There were inefficiencies in the health sector,
with regard to pharmaceutical, primary care and hospital expenditure. Past reforms had contributed to
improve the sustainability of pension spending in the long term, but the pension system was still
generating inter- and intra-generational inequities and excessive budget pressure in the shorter term. (45)
Non-pension social benefits were not well targeted. The unemployment benefit system was granting little
access to younger workers, while the benefits for those who qualified were relatively high and granted for
a relatively long period. (46) A new Budgetary Framework Law had been approved in 2011, before the
programme started. The law included important improvements, in particular by setting up a multi-annual
framework, with expenditure and budget balance rules. However, vulnerabilities still existed with regard
to weak line ministry accountability, accounting fragmentation among different levels of government, and
fiscal risks, especially from SOEs and PPPs.

(43) The education sector and the security forces accounted for a high percentage of the government workforce, significantly above
     EU comparators. The ratio of students per teacher was much lower than in most other countries, with no comparative
     advantages in terms of performance of the education system. The density of police forces was amongst the highest in Europe.
     IMF (2013a)
(44) DG ECFIN (2012c), IMF (2013a), Mercer (2013). See also Giordano, R. et al. (2011) and De Castro, F. et al. (2013).
(45) Past reforms had protected current retirees and had granted transition periods for those who had not retired yet, while placing
     the burden on next generations. The scheme for public employees appointed before 2006 (CGA) was more generous than the
     general system for private workers and for new entrants in the public administration.
(46) IMF (2013a), Lemgruber, A., Soto, M. et al. (2012).




                                                                                                                                       47
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Tax revenues were below the euro area average and affected by inefficiencies. In 2011, the tax-to-
            GDP ratio of Portugal was 4 pp below the euro area average. The implicit tax rate on consumption was
            below EU and euro area average, including due to extensive use of reduced VAT rates. Revenue from
            recurrent property taxes, which together with consumption taxes are among the least detrimental to
            growth (Johansson, A. et al 2008), was still low. Concerning the corporate tax, Portugal had a significant
            debt bias, substantially above the EU average, measured as the difference between the effective marginal
            tax rates for new equity and debt-funded investment. In general, the Portuguese tax systems was
            characterised by extensive tax expenditures, narrowing tax bases and contributing to the need for higher
            tax rates. The shadow economy in Portugal was also significant, estimated at 17-24% of GDP (47),
            causing losses of government revenues. Tax verification function was understaffed, when compared with
            other OECD countries. (48)

            The programme aimed at reducing the budget deficit and stabilising public debt, by acting on both
            expenditure and revenue and by streamlining the public sector through a number of fiscal-
            structural measures. The programme called for the budget deficit to achieve the 3% of GDP threshold
            by 2013, with public debt peaking in the same year. This path was considered an appropriate trade-off
            between the need to take decisive action to restore market confidence while avoiding an excessive toll on
            growth and employment. Expenditure cuts and revenue increases were to be supported by a number of
            actions qualified as 'fiscal-structural measures', which consisted of reforms to the way the public sector
            operates. Some of these measures built on plans that the Portuguese authorities were already developing.

            Fiscal conditionality was framed in terms of nominal targets for the overall budget deficit and
            included the estimation of the yield of the fiscal measures. These targets were appropriate in light of
            the debt sustainability consideration. The headline deficit net of one-offs had been about 8.5% of GDP
            in 2010, excluding measures in support of the banking sector. (49) (see Box 4.1). Under the programme,
            targets were initially set at 5.9% in 2011, 4.5% in 2012 and 3.0% in 2013. This fiscal trajectory was to be
            supported by consolidation packages amounting to 5.7% of GDP in 2011, 3.0% in 2012 and 1.9% in
            2013. These targets can be considered ambitious, when compared with the Portuguese track record. An
            alternative could have been to set targets on structural deficits to let the automatic stabilisers work freely
            and allow negative surprises to be absorbed within the programme. Nevertheless, this approach has severe
            shortcomings at times of rapid economic adjustment. (50) Another alternative would have been to set
            looser nominal targets with the aim of helping credibility through over-performance. Given the
            uncertainty at the inception of the programme about the debt evolution (51), planning a more gradual
            consolidation path would have implied significant risks. The debt would have been projected to peak at
            higher levels and its subsequent reduction would have relied on the country's ability to deliver consistent
            primary surplus, over the subsequent medium term. Such a strategy would also have required a larger
            financial envelope.

            The fiscal consolidation was intended to be frontloaded and clearly tilted towards a reduction of
            expenditure rather than an increase of revenues. More than half of the fiscal consolidation was to be
            implemented in 2011, while the rest was to be split between 2012 and 2013. In terms of the sum of the
            measures to be introduced, 2/3 of the fiscal consolidation was to be generated by savings in expenditure.



            (47) DG ECFIN (2014c) making reference to Schneider, F.(2013), the Portuguese statistics office (INE) and Barbosa, E. et al.
                 (2013). See also Schneider, F.(2010) and Schneider, F., Williams, C. (2013).
            (48) Eurostat data, DG ECFIN and DG TAXUD (2012, 2013), OECD (2013b), OECD (2013c), OECD (2015a).
            (49) Programme targets do not take into consideration the support to the banking sector.
            (50) Large revisions in the potential output make the structural balance a very unstable measure for countries at a time of strong
                 economic adjustment. In times of change, the concept of potential output is very difficult to quantify and elasticities are likely to
                 vary over time. In addition, in uncertain economic times, there is also no reason to expect expenditure and revenues to follow
                 standard patterns of behaviour captured by semi-elasticities as economic fundamentals are shifting.
            (51) According to the IMF, it was difficult to state categorically that there was a high probability that debt was sustainable over the
                 medium term. IMF support was justified given the high risk of international systemic spillover effects. (IMF, 2011a)




48
                                                                                                                               4. Fiscal policy




The 2011 fiscal target was looser than previously envisaged by Portugal, but still very ambitious
especially considering that this was to be achieved through significant expenditure cuts. The initial
programme targets were looser than those proposed in February 2011 by Portugal in the Stability
Programme (Table 4.1), partly to reflect the impact on the deficit of the SOEs reclassification that
occurred between March and April 2011. However, for 2011 the target still implied an expected
improvement of 2.7 pp in the deficit net of one-offs, mainly on the expenditure side.

In a climate of urgency, the programme aimed at addressing the most evident inefficiencies and
immediate sources of risk. In the absence of an existing spending review, the programme targeted
expenditure mainly through cuts to public staff, pension expenditure, social benefits, SOEs, PPPs and
health system. Public staff was to be reduced by 2% per year during 2012-2014(52), by limiting hiring and
reducing fixed contracts. Savings in pension expenditure were expected from a reduction of higher
pensions and the suspension of indexation. Savings in social benefits were to be generated through better
targeting, including means-testing. With regard to SOEs, the MoU envisaged rationalising services and
cutting operational costs. Similarly, PPPs had to be renegotiated to reduce contingent liabilities for the
state. Further reduction of the general government perimeter was to be achieved through progress in the
privatisation programme, which built on previous government plans. A wide range of actions, also built
on ongoing initiatives, addressed areas of inefficiency in the health sector. The programme conditionality
aimed at reducing the stock of domestic arrears, which were a concern especially for the health sector and
local authorities. A comprehensive reform of the Budgetary Framework Law was envisaged by the end of
2013 with the aim of addressing the still existing vulnerabilities.

Some initiatives for tackling the underlying structural problems driving excessive public
expenditure were introduced in parallel, but at a slower pace. The programme did not include a clear
provision for an exhaustive spending review to design expenditure measures since the beginning.
Conditionality required the upfront preparation of a plan to improve flexibility, adaptability and mobility
of human resources. Despite indications of a positive public-to-private wage premium in Portugal, it took
six months to include the requirement of an assessment, with a one-year deadline. There was no
requirement to address the level and complexity of public wage supplements until two years into the
programme. These assessments were not framed as part of a full civil service reform, including reviewing
the structure of the public sector wages - in accordance to responsibility and expertise - recruitment,
performance evaluation, and career expectations. The requirement for a comprehensive reform of the
pension system was only included in 2013.

The programme included other measures that were arguably not the most important to induce the
necessary change to public finances dynamics. The programme included the development of the use of
shared services in the areas of financial, human and IT resources. At local level, parishes and
municipalities were to be reorganised. The network of decentralised services of ministries was to be
rationalised. A detailed cost/benefit analysis of all public and quasi-public entities, including foundations,
associations and other bodies was to be prepared by 2011. While all these measures were needed to
increase the efficiency of the public administration and, at least some of them, could contribute to
improve the perception of the programme by the public opinion, their main purpose was not to generate
significant savings, therefore it can be questioned whether they can be considered macrocritical in a
programme context.

The programme included a wide range of appropriate measures to improve the revenue
administration. The tax administration was appropriately required to develop upfront a strategic plan
2012-2014. A number of organisational changes were to be implemented to improve the collection of
revenues. The programme included an upfront review of the state of the IT systems and the preparation of
an IT strategic plan, with the support of technical assistance. A clear risk management approach for

(52) For local administrations, special provisions were set in the state budget to reduce transfers in case of missed targets for
     employment reduction. The 2% target was a condition in the government's adjustment programme for Madeira.




                                                                                                                                             49
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            taxpayer selection was to be adopted and resources devoted to auditing had to be increased to at least 30%
            of total staff, mostly through reallocations. A number of measures were included, in order to make the
            resolution of tax cases more efficient. In Portugal, the tax court system featured an excessive backlog and
            a low balance of cases won/lost. The programme appropriately included the implementation of a new tax
            arbitration law (to reduce the number of cases for tax courts) and the clearing of the backlog of cases
            worth above € 1 million (through a task force of judges). This was appropriate given the focus on
            compliance by large taxpayers and High Net Worth Individuals (HNWI). All these measures were
            relevant in light of the country's relatively low tax revenues, including because of the significant shadow
            economy.

            A budget-neutral fiscal devaluation was included in the programme. As a member of a currency
            union, Portugal could not resort to currency depreciation to improve external competitiveness in the short
            term. The programme envisaged internal devaluation through a budget-neutral reduction of the
            employers' social security contributions (fiscal devaluation – see Section 4.2.1). In qualitative terms, this
            was expected to have a similar positive effect on the external balance, through the impact of the cut in
            production costs on final prices and therefore on external competitiveness. Furthermore, as one of the
            possibilities for achieving neutrality was through VAT increase, this measure would have improved the
            external balance also through lower imports due to lower consumption.


            4.2.        IMPLEMENTATION


            4.2.1. Pace and composition of fiscal consolidation

            During the programme, the headline deficit targets were revised twice, because of negative
            macroeconomic developments outside the control of the government. The first revision took place in
            September 2012 (Table 4.1), amid disappointing economic growth - in particular, for domestic demand
            (Table 4.2) - which fed into tax revenues coming in about 2pp of GDP lower than projected (Table 4.3).
            (53) The second revision of the targets took place in 2013 following a Constitutional Court ruling against
            the cuts of the 13th and 14th monthly payments to pensioners and public employees (see Box 4.2). The
            Court imposed a full reinstatement of these payments as from 2013. As the cuts had reduced expenditure
            by 1.5% of GDP in 2012, their reversal increased spending in 2013 by an equivalent amount. The
            decision was taken to extend the EDP deadline to 2015.

             Table 4.1:
             Fiscal Targets        (% of GDP – ESA-95)

                                                                                              2011     2012      2013     2014
                                                              Stability Programme Feb. 2011   -4.6     -3.0      -2.0
                                                        (1)   MoU                             -5.9     -4.5      -3.0
             General Government Headline Deficit
                                                              1 st Revision                            -5.0      -4.5      -2.5
                                                              2 nd Revision                                      -5.5      -4.0
             (1)
                   Excluding support to the banking sector




            (53) Furthermore, reduced disposable income may have induced rebalancing of consumption toward lower-tax goods and tax
                 compliance may have weakened (DG ECFIN, 2012c).




50
                                                                                                                                                4. Fiscal policy




Table 4.2:
Overview of macroeconomic data (y-o-y % change - ESA-95)

                                                                                                                                          (2)
                                                                        2010           2011          2012           2013         2014
                                                          (1)
                                            Projections                  3.9           -1.1           -2.6          -1.4            1.1
Private consumption expenditure
                                            Outturns                     3.8           -0.2           -4.0          -1.4            1.5
                                                          (1)
Domestic demand
                                            Projections                  2.0           -3.8           -5.0          -1.9            0.3
                                            Outturns                     2.2           -4.1           -7.0          -1.3            1.0
                                                          (1)
Employment
                                            Projections                  -1.5          -1.5           -1.6           -1.6          -0.5
                                            Outturns                     -1.5          -1.5           -4.2           -2.8           2.0
                                                          (1)
                                             Projections                   2.3         -1.2           -1.9           0.3              1.7
GDP
                                             Outturns                      2.5         -1.0           -3.5           0.4              1.6
(1)
    Source for 2010, 2011: DG ECFIN (2011a, original MoU) / Sources for 2012, 2013, 2014: projections at the time of detailing fiscal
consolidation for the following year without target revision = for 2012: DG ECFIN (2011b, Dec. 2011) , for 2013: DG ECFIN (2012d, Dec.
(2)
      Source: DG ECFIN (2014c, October 2014)




Table 4.3:
Overview of fiscal figures (% of GDP - ESA-95)

                                                                        2010           2011          2012           2013         2014 (2)
                                            Projections (1)             13.4           13.9           15.2          13.7           13.4
Indirect taxes
                                            Outturns                    13.4           13.7           13.7          13.6           13.7
                                            Projections (1)              8.9            9.1           9.3           11.3           11.1
Direct taxes
                                            Outturns                     8.8            9.9           9.3           11.8           11.4
                                            Projections (1)             12.2           12.5           12.0          12.0           11.6
Social Contributions
                                            Outturns                    12.2           12.2           11.6          12.2           12.1
                                            Projections (1)             12.2           11.5           10.0          10.3           9.4
Compensation of employees
                                            Outturns                    12.2           11.4           10.0          10.7           10.0
                                             Projections (1)              17.0         17.4           16.7          18.3            18.5
Social transfer other than in kind
                                             Outturns                     17.0         17.3           18.0          18.8            18.4
(1)
    Source for 2010 and 2011: DG ECFIN (2011a, original MoU) / Sources for 2012, 2013, 2014: projections at the time of detailing fiscal
consolidation for the following year without target revision = for 2012: DG ECFIN (2011b, Dec. 2011) , for 2013: DG ECFIN (2012d, Dec.
(2)
      Source: Outturns based on DG ECFIN (2014c, October 2014)


At the beginning of the programme, Portugal used positive one-offs to comply with fiscal
requirements. In 2011, the deficit came in at 4.0% (Table 4.4 and Box 4.1), below the 5.9% of GDP
target, due to the effect of the transfer of the banks' pension funds to the state (worth 3.5% of GDP). (54)
Net of one-offs, the deficit stepped down by only 1.3% instead of the planned 2.7%. In 2012, Portugal
missed the revised deficit target by 1 pp of GDP. This was accepted under the programme on the basis
that at the time the statistical authorities had not classified the sale of ANA airport concession as deficit-
decreasing offsetting factor; this would reduce the deficit by 0.7% of GDP bringing it closer to the target.




(54) The transfer of the banks' pension funds increased future social security pension expenditure. In 2012, this translated in
     additional expenditure worth about € 0.5bn or 0.3% of GDP. On the other hand, revenues from social contributions benefitted
     from the inclusion of banks' employees in the general social security scheme. The transfer of the banks' pension funds also
     increased the banks' recapitalisation needs, because of the full recognition of actuarial losses accumulated over past years (DG
     ECFIN, 2011c and 2012a; CdF, 2013 and 2014b).




                                                                                                                                                              51
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




             Table 4.4:
             Fiscal targets vs outturns         (% of GDP – ESA-95 unless otherwise stated)

                                                                                      2010    2011          2012         2013         2014 (2)
                                                             Revised targets                  -5.9           -5           -5.5          -4.0
                                                (1)
             General Government Balance                      Outturns                  -8.5   -4.0          -6.0          -4.5          -4.5
                                                             Net of one-offs           -8.6   -7.3          -6.0          -5.3          -3.4
                                                             MoU                              41.8          42.4          42.3
             Total revenues
                                                             Outturns                 41.4    45.0          40.9          43.7         44.5
                                                             MoU                              47.7          46.9          45.3
             Total expenditures
                                                             Outturns (1)             50.0    49.0          46.9          48.2         48.9
             (1)
                   Excluding support to the banking sector
             (2)
                   ESA-2010


            Besides the recessionary European environment, the drastic horizontal cuts to achieve the initial
            target for 2012 may have contributed to weak growth outcomes. Despite the disappointing outcome of
            2011, the programme did not change course: the original 2012 target implied an expected improvement of
            2.8 pp in the deficit net of one-offs, mainly on the expenditure side. In the absence of ongoing reforms of
            the public sector that could be expected to deliver upfront such substantial tailored savings, the approach
            was to introduce horizontal and temporary cuts, such as the suspension of 13th and 14th monthly payments
            to pensioners and public employees. The worse than originally expected recessionary European
            environment, including in Spain – the main Portuguese trading partner –, weighed on the economic
            performance of Portugal. However, these cuts may have played a role in the dramatic fall of domestic
            demand in 2012. The cuts to public wages and pensions impacted on both current and expected
            disposable incomes of an important part of the population. Impaired access to credit during the financial
            crisis is likely to have further amplified the impact, while the income effect that would increase labour
            supply was limited with regard to public employees and pensioners.(55) Following the reversal of monthly
            payments cuts and their replacement with revenue measures, the decrease in internal demand significantly
            slowed down in 2013 (Table 4.2). At the end of 2012, the programme partners accepted a deficit of 6% of
            GDP, missing even the revised target.

            In addition to one-offs, the fiscal consolidation was heavily based on measures that were to be
            replaced by fiscal-structural reforms yielding permanent savings. However, progress on public
            wages and pensions reforms was slow. Exceptional budgetary measures would allow the deficit to be
            closed, while giving the Portuguese authorities the necessary time to develop structural measures that
            would deliver permanent savings. Budgetary measures were allowed by the Constitutional Court only
            temporarily, on the basis of urgency and extraordinary economic circumstances (Box 4.2). Notably, the
            suspension of the 13th and 14th monthly pension and public staff payments, introduced in 2012, was
            rejected by the Court as soon as in 2013. Alternative structural measures were not advanced promptly. A
            spending review was only started in mid-2012 and it was mainly based on proposals from the line
            ministries through a bottom-up approach. Following the assessment of the existence of a positive public
            wage premium for less demanding jobs and the opposite for more demanding jobs, the government only
            introduced the plan of a single wage and a single wage supplement scale, which was delayed until after
            programme expiration and safeguarded the remuneration of incumbent staff. (56) The comprehensive
            structural reform of the pension system was postponed until after the 2015 elections.



            (55) Reducing spending has a short-term contractionary impact that is greater than increasing taxes (Barrel, R. et al., 2012). About
                 the role of current and future disposable income in consumption behaviour, see Almeida, V. et al. (2011). About the effect of
                 impaired access to credit, see Corsetti, G. et al. (2012). In 2010, public employees represented 11% of the total labour force
                 (OECD, 2012a). In 2012, population over 65-year-old was about 17% of the population (and 30% of the working age
                 population) (OECD data and OECD, 2013a)
            (56) The new single wage scale has become effective at the beginning of 2015. (DG ECFIN, 2015b). In the framework of the
                 stakeholder consultation, the issue of the level and structure of the public wages emerged as particularly controversial. It was
                 also mentioned that a comprehensive reform of the civil service was needed.




52
                                                                                                                                  4. Fiscal policy




Despite lack of progress in permanent expenditure cuts, fiscal performance was broadly in line with
the targets in the second half of the programme, when it became more revenue-based. In 2013, the
objective of a 2/3 expenditure-based consolidation was finally abandoned. The revised target was
overachieved by around 1% of GDP (Table 4.4), as tax revenues rebounded (Table 4.3), following the
revision of PIT and partly as a result of a one-off tax measure. Without the latter, the deficit would have
come around the target. After the programme expired, Portugal missed its 2014 target by 0.5 pp of GDP,
while revenues kept on increasing (Table 4.3). The target would have been achieved without negative
one-offs, which nevertheless contributed to prospective savings for the general government. Changes to
debt management of the transport SOEs had an immediate negative impact on the deficit, but contributed
to strengthening the sector's underlying position. Public staff departures implied upfront costs for
financial incentives but contributed to reducing the public wage bill in future years.

PIT contributed the most to the revenue-based consolidation, driven by an increase in tax rates.
Personal income tax was significantly revised in 2013: the tax rates were increased, particularly for higher
incomes, through a new permanent rate structure and a system of temporary surcharges. (57) Other
measures during the programme reduced benefits and deductions, broadening the base. As a result,
receipts from PIT increased by 36%, from € 9.6bn in 2010 to € 13.1bn in 2013, despite employment, and
gross wages and salaries per employee decreasing. Higher tax rates can have a negative impact on labour
supply, but, at least in the short term, this impact is likely to have been limited by the large degree of
slack in the economy. In 2013, the contribution of taxation to inactivity or unemployment traps was still
relatively low. (58)

The VAT structure has been made more efficient. The standard rate of VAT was increased from 21 to
23% in 2011. The base was broadened by narrowing the application of the reduced rate in 2012 and this
was appropriate considering that the VAT policy gap in 2013 was still well above the EU average. (59)
Despite the review of the rate structure, receipts from VAT declined in 2012 and 2013 as a result of
declining consumption. In 2014 private consumption was growing again and this resulted in an overall
increase in VAT receipts amounting to 8.5%, during the programme period. The VAT measures increased
the efficiency of the VAT structure, because the tax base broadened and the list of items moving to higher
rates included goods and services that are complementary to leisure, limiting the impact on labour
supply.(60) The slack in the economy is likely to have contained the inflationary impact.

Base-broadening measures to increase taxation on immovable property were appropriate but
Portugal could have shifted more towards recurrent property taxation. Portugal concluded the
reassessment of property values in 2013. Following the widening of the tax base, municipalities lowered
their tax rates, while safeguard clauses prevented a too high increase for low-income taxpayers. During
the programme period, taxes on immovable property increased by about 16%, as a result of a decrease in
transaction taxes (-17%) and a significant rise in recurrent taxes (+33%). (61) This decrease in transaction
taxes was due to the crisis, so more should have been done to shift taxation to recurrent property taxes.


(57) This system included a surtax of 3.5% on income above annual minimum wage and solidarity rates applied on incomes subject
     to the marginal tax rate. When the programme expired, the gradual reversal of the temporary surcharge on personal income tax
     over 2016 to 2019 was projected to have a permanent deficit-increasing impact of 0.4%. In the framework of the stakeholder
     consultation, it was mentioned that the programme did not correct the instability and complexity of the tax system and that the
     tax hikes introduced during the programme are temporary.
(58) DG ECFIN and DG TAXUD (2015). Other contributors to 'traps' being, e.g. withdrawn unemployment benefits, social
     assistance and housing benefits. In 2012, the only 'trap' above the EU and euro area averages was the unemployment trap at
     67% of the average wage and the difference became even slightly worse in 2013. However, the contribution of taxation was still
     relatively low, pointing to the need for a targeted action on the social benefits side.
 59
( ) The VAT policy gap is the gap between the VAT theoretical tax liability and the 'ideal' liability without reduced rates or
     exemptions. (DG ECFIN and DG TAXUD, 2015)
(60) A number of studies illustrate the welfare gains that can be achieved by means of broadening the VAT base, such as Mirrlees, J
     et al (2010) Research favours taxing complements to leisure at the highest rate, in order to make them unattractive compared to
     work. This is referred to as the Corlett-Hague Rule, (Corlett and Hague, 1953). See DG ECFIN and DG TAXUD (2011).
(61) Calculations based on INE data.




                                                                                                                                                53
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            The corporate income tax (CIT) has appropriately been made more growth-friendly. On
            competitiveness grounds, the statutory tax rate was reduced from 25 to 23% (21%, shortly after the
            programme). A system of progressive surcharges made taxation heavier for more profitable corporations.
            Tax expenditure has been reduced, through the reduction of deductions and special regimes. The
            deductibility of debt interest was limited, a tax deduction for retained and reinvested earnings was
            introduced, the allowance for corporate equity was kept in force for SMEs. These measures went in the
            right direction of reducing the debt bias. Given the need to increase productivity and competitiveness on
            the international markets, other measures such as the introduction of a tax credit for investment expenses
            and the extension of incentives for research and development up to 2020 were rightly implemented.

            The move towards more revenue measures may have supported short-term demand, while giving
            more time for implementing expenditure cuts. Ultimately Portugal shied away from pursuing the
            difficult measures that would help it over the medium term. Increasing taxes could improve the
            budgetary situation at less immediate cost to aggregate demand, especially when impact on labour supply
            and prices could be expected to be subdued. However, following the achievement of the fiscal targets,
            Portugal has not finalised the structural measures on expenditure. The inefficiencies in Portuguese public
            spending were the result of years of political choices that required strong political will to address and that
            had a negative impact on Portugal's key weakness: economic growth. By raising current expenditure in
            2013, growth was once again based on domestic demand (CdF, 2015b). This could have only been an
            intermediate step towards a durable solution on expenditure. By shying away from pursuing it, Portugal
            missed an opportunity to make the choices that would be most beneficial to it over the medium term.

            Contextual factors might have contributed to weakening the reform momentum. These may include
            the relaxation of the financial constraints as Portugal returned to the debt market. This was facilitated by
            the announcement of the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) by the ECB in summer 2012, and the
            revision of the euro area official debt maturities to around 20 years, in late 2013. (62) In addition, reform
            fatigue kicked in, while the political context was weakening.

            A budget-neutral fiscal devaluation was first postponed and then abandoned. The cost of each
            percentage point of reduction of the employers' contributions was estimated at €400 million. For 2012,
            the government considered offsetting the cost of the fiscal devaluation through a VAT increase or public
            expenditure cut, but these measures had to be used to cover the fiscal gap. Similarly in 2013, the fiscal
            devaluation would have required a substantial adjustment of the fiscal targets, in the absence of
            alternative offsetting measures. In September 2012, the government proposed the so-called 18/18
            measure, which consisted in compensating the reduction of the employers' contributions (from 23.75 to
            18%) through a substantial rise of the employees' contributions (from 11 to 18%). This proposal was
            dropped after it generated social discontent and brought the government on the verge of a crisis. The
            reduction in the disposable income of workers would have negatively affected internal demand, which in
            turn would have had a negative impact on the large majority of SMEs. (63)

            A non-budget-neutral fiscal devaluation would have implied significant risks for the public
            finances, while it might have not achieved its full potential and would not have contributed to
            changing the structural features of the economy. With hindsight, the overachievement of the revised
            fiscal target in 2013 could lead to the conclusion that there would have been fiscal space to accommodate
            a non-budget neutral fiscal devaluation. However, the overachievement was possible only after the deficit
            target revision in mid-2013, and thanks to revenue one-offs, whose dissipation could have led to another
            target revision in 2014. Moreover, while Portugal was benefitting from external factors, such as the
            adjustment of the terms of the official debt and the announcement of the OMT, it had yet to regain market
            access on a sustained basis. In general, the advantages of a fiscal devaluation depend on the translation of


            (62) Already in 2011, debt maturities had been extended from around 7.5 years to 12.5 (EFSM) and 15 years (EFSF). In the same
                 context, the interest margins had been cancelled.
            (63) Economic analysts quoted by media when public debate on the proposed fiscal devaluation was ongoing.




54
                                                                                                                                   4. Fiscal policy




lower labour costs into lower prices and/or higher supply, and consequently into more employment.
However, this requires an adequate level of competition in the markets, and either gaps in the capacity
utilisation or access to finance for further investment, while the Portuguese economy was featuring
competition shortcomings and deleveraging pressure. This might have translated into higher rents,
especially in the non-tradable sector. Moreover, even if fully successful, the fiscal devaluation could have
borne benefits in the short term but it could have hardly contributed to change the low-productivity
Portuguese business model. (64) A selective reduction of the employers' contributions targeted to the
tradable sector, or parts of it, would have been less onerous for the public budget and more beneficial for
an economy in need for change, but this approach should have been in line with the competition rules.




(64) In the framework of the stakeholder consultation, it was mentioned that, in the short term, a fiscal devaluation would have been
     beneficial to the economy. It was also mentioned that, in a wider perspective, struggling for price competitiveness through this
     type of measures was not the best way forward.




                                                                                                                                                 55
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                     Box 4.1: Some considerations on the impact of the change from ESA-95 to ESA-2010 in
                                                           Portugal

                The ESA-95 accounting system was being used during the programme years, while ESA-2010 entered into
                force during the second half of 2014. The change in accounting systems heavily affected the amount of one-
                offs with an impact on the 2011-2014 budget balances. Consequently, the differences in terms of headline
                deficit are significant (Graph 1.a), while the dynamics of the 'balance net of one-offs' and of the 'structural
                balance' are far more consistent (Graph 1.b). The significant differences between headline budgets in 2011
                and 2014 are mainly explained by:
                −         The transfer in 2011 of banks' pension funds to the government. Under ESA-95, this is classified as a
                          revenue-increasing operation, with a direct positive impact on deficit worth 3.5 percent of GDP. Under
                          ESA-2010, this is just a financial transaction with no impact of deficit;
                −         SOEs reclassification. Under ESA-2010, many SOEs are reclassified into the general government
                          perimeter, because of a 'strengthened' quantitative market/non market test (sales do not cover at least 50
                          percent of the production costs, including net interest charges) or 'strengthened' qualitative criteria (this
                          applied to hospitals, public holdings, market regulatory bodies, etc.). (1) SOEs are retroactively
                          reclassified as from the year when the criteria have been satisfied. Since then, subsidies or capital
                          transfers from the State to these reclassified SOEs do not impact on the consolidated budget of general
                          government, as they become just internal transfers.
                                      Graph 1a: Headline Budget Deficit                      Graph 1b: Net of one-offs and structural
                     0                                                                0                     balance
                     -1                                                               -1
                     -2                                                               -2
                     -3                                                               -3
                     -4                                                               -4
                     -5                                                               -5
                     -6                                                               -6
                     -7                                                               -7
                     -8                                                               -8
                     -9                                                               -9
                    -10                                                              -10
                               2011           2012          2013        2014                 2011         2012            2013                2014
                                                                                                    Budget deficit, net of one-offs -ESA 95
                                               Balance - EDP - ESA 95                               Budget deficit, net of one-offs -ESA 10
                                               Balance - EDP - ESA 10                               Structural balance - ESA 95
                                                                                                    Structural balance - ESA 10



                Even if the ESA-95 and ESA-2010 'budget deficit net of one-offs' and structural balances follow far more
                similar paths (Graph 1.b), there are still differences in their composition. The ESA-2010 reclassification of
                many SOEs brought their expenditure and revenues directly into the general government budget. On the
                expenditure side, general government's intermediate consumption, compensation of employees and public
                investment shifted upward compared to ESA-95 (see Table 1). At the same time, the general government
                budget benefited from a significant decrease of the social transfers in kind supplied to household via market
                producers due to the reclassification of many health care providers within the government perimeter (no
                longer as market producers ).




                (1) Comparison between DGTF (2014), page 29 and DGTF (2015), page 32. See also INE (2014a)
                                                                                                             (Continued on the next page)




56
                                                                                                               4. Fiscal policy




Box (continued)

Table 1:
Impact of ESA-2010 on selected items of expenditure   (% of GDP)

                                                                   2010   2011    2012      2013      2014
                                               ESA-95              5.2    4.6     4.5        4.4      n.a.
Intermediate consumption
                                               ESA-2010            5.9    6.0      5.8       5.6      5.8
                                               ESA-95              12.2   11.3    10.0      10.7      n.a.
Compensation of employees
                                               ESA-2010            13.7   12.8    11.7      12.5      11.8
                                               ESA-95              3.8    2.6     1.7        1.4      n.a.
Gross fixed capital formation
                                               ESA-2010            5.3    3.5      2.5       2.2      2.0
Source: Eurostat



Given the above, within this report, ESA-95 data are used when comparing the headline deficit targets with
the related outturns, as this metric was prevailing when the targets were set and revised. The rest of the
analysis is based on ESA-2010 data, as they include final data for 2014, projections for 2015-2016, and this
metric is now adopted to assess current and future progress in terms of sustainability of public finances.




                                                                                                                             57
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                              Box 4.2: Constitutional Court rulings on fiscal consolidation measures

                Rulings of the Constitutional Court impacted on key fiscal policy measures included in the programme. (1)

                Reduction of the public sector workers' pay
                The Court stated that in exceptional economic/financial circumstances and in order to quickly reduce the
                budget deficit, the legislator can lower the income of public administration staff, even if this leads to
                unequal treatment compared to the private sector. However, public costs must be fairly shared among
                society so there is a limit to this possibility (principle of equality). Furthermore, as time passes, the legislator
                is subject to a gradually increasing requirement to find alternatives to prevent the difference in treatment
                from becoming excessive.
                The Court accepted the temporary average cut of 5 percent to public sector wages that had been introduced
                in 2011. In view of the principle of equality, the Court instead ruled against the suspension of the 13th and
                14th month payments to public sector workers, but did not require reinstatement for 2012, in order to avoid
                endangering the State's solvency. The principle of equality applied also when in 2014 the Court rejected the
                attempt to replace the '5 percent' pay cut with another norm that would have extended cuts to lower wages
                and would have changed the progressive rates applied so far. Then the legislator tried to reintroduce the ‘5
                percent’ pay cut for the period 2014-2018, with the cut reduced by 20 percent in 2015, but without
                specification about further reversal in the following years. The Court applied again the principle of equality
                and rejected the cuts for the period 2016-2018. In this case, the Court made reference also to legitimate
                expectations, as the pay-cuts had always been presented as transitional and justified by exceptional
                economic circumstances, which were improving in 2014.
                Cuts to pensions
                When ruling about pensions, the principle of trust was crucial, as dealing with acquired rights of persons for
                whom it is more difficult to adapt to new circumstances. Nevertheless, the Court clarified that new
                legislation can have repercussions on the past, when constitutionally protected rights and interests are
                deemed to prevail over the pensioners' legitimate expectations.
                In view of the principle of equality, the Court ruled against the suspension of the 13th and 14th month
                payments to pensioners, but did not require reinstatement for 2012, in order to avoid endangering the State's
                solvency. On the contrary, the Court accepted the Extraordinary Solidarity Contribution (CES) for all
                pensions (above specific thresholds), as it was exceptional and transitory, to react to a situation of
                emergency. However, the Court stated again that the legislator had to look for alternative measures to
                prevent the prolonging of differentiated treatments.
                In view of the principle of trust, at the end of 2013, the Court rejected the cut of the value of CGA pensions.
                The Court argued that the existence of diverging legal regimes in terms of conditions for retirement and
                calculation of the pension resulted from the recognition that, at the time of approval there were sufficient
                grounds to justify these differences. The cuts could not be justified either by the aim of safeguarding the
                sustainability of the CGA pension system - the system was closed to new beneficiaries as of the 1st of
                January 2006, so it could not be self-sustaining – or by the public interest in reducing the transfers from the
                State budget.
                In light of the principle of trust, in 2014 the Court rejected the Sustainability Contribution (CS). The CS
                raised difficulties in terms of equality, internal fairness and intra-generational justice and did not solve inter-
                generational problems. The Court stated that CS affect recipients of future pensions, without weighing up of
                the serious effects that the successive changes in calculation regime and the introduction of the sustainability
                factor would mean for the determination of the amount of pensions and the retirement age.



                (1) Ruling 353/12 of 5/7/2012, ruling 187/13 of 5/4/2013, ruling 862/13 of 19/12/2013, ruling 413/14 of 30/5/2014,
                    ruling 572/14 of 30/7/2014, ruling 574/14 and ruling 575/14 of 14/8/2014: summaries published by the Constitutional
                    Court http://www.tribunalconstitucional.pt/tc/en/acordaos/
                                                                                                         (Continued on the next page)




58
                                                                                                                        4. Fiscal policy




Box (continued)

In 2014, the Court rejected the reduction of survivors' pensions, but only because of its design (principle of
equality). The size of the reduction was acceptable, but it applied only to accumulation with other retirement
pensions and not with other income situations.
Overall considerations
As from mid-2013, the programme explicitly requested the Portuguese government to take a number of steps
to mitigate the legal risks of future potential Constitutional Court rulings. This included justifying measures
on compliance with the fiscal sustainability rules in the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance
(TSCG). Nevertheless, the Court made clear that the TSCG does not enjoy the status the Constitution grant
to the Treaties governing the EU and norms issued by the EU institutions in the exercise of their
competence. Another recommendation concerned the possibility of prior constitutional review of laws, thus
allowing early reaction. The President of the Republic has the right to submit reform proposals to a prior
legal review by the Constitutional Court which has to be completed within four weeks.
The Court draws its legal reasoning from general constitutional principles, such as the principles of equality,
proportionality and trust (democratic state based on the rule of law). By nature, the margins of these
principles are not clear-cut and their application to concrete cases is not straightforward. This translated in
some measures being accepted, while others rejected. (2) In addition, in all the above mentioned rejections,
dissenting judges expressed deviating opinions. The only unanimous ruling was the one about CGA, but two
judges disagreed with the use of the principle of trust.
In general, it emerged that, within limits, the Constitution allows that the budget laws compress the principle
of equality, but this can only be temporary and implies immediate progress towards alternative solutions. In
addition, it is possible to overrule legitimate expectations through well balanced structural laws, but this
requires proportionality and a clear link with constitutionally protected rights and interests that are deemed
to prevail.

(2) Other measures were subject to Constitutional ruling, such as the PIT reform (accepted), contributions on
    employment and sickness benefits (rejected), payment of overtime (accepted), suspension of pension supplements at
    SOEs with net losses in the last 3 years (accepted).




                                                                                                                                      59
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            4.2.2. Flanking the expenditure effort

            Public staff was significantly reduced, but this process was not led by an upfront and proactive
            strategy to focus on areas of over-employment. The public wage bill dropped during the programme
            period by more than 16%, as a result of temporary wage cuts and, more significantly, of staff reduction.
            As from 2011, government wages were temporarily frozen and cut by 5 percent on average. Promotions
            were blocked. Management positions and administrative units in the central administration were reduced
            upfront and the internal organisation of each entity was re-defined. (65) The target concerning the
            reduction of staff of the public administration was achieved, with less strong implementation in regions
            compared to central and local administrations (see Table 4.5). The restructuring of SOEs and the
            privatisation process helped. Several career-specific programmes for the termination of contracts by
            mutual agreement were launched for less qualified workers, teachers and senior experts in areas with
            over-employment. Nevertheless, the measure to reinforce this tool was included only one year after the
            start of the programme. The related terminations started late, only at the end of 2013, and gave a marginal
            and below-expectations contribution to the overall reduction. (66) Similar programmes were not adopted
            for defence (military and police), which was another area of overemployment.

             Table 4.5:
             Change in employment in public administration (y-o-y % change)

                                                                                          2012        2013        2014 (p)        2012-2014
             Central administration                                                        -4.8        -5.9         -1.9            -10.4
             Azores                                                                        -2.2        -2.3         0.0              -4.5
             Madeira                                                                       -2.4        -3.5         -1.0             -5.8
             Local administration                                                          -3.6        -5.2         -2.3             -8.6
             Total public administration                                                   -4.4        -5.6         -1.9             -9.7
             Source: DG ECFIN, European Economy, Occasional Paper 202/2014. Calculations based on SIOE database; (p) provisional


            The new scheme for the re-orientation of careers towards the real needs in the administration was
            introduced late and had a marginal impact. Initially, new rules were submitted to Parliament to
            facilitate geographic mobility. Later during the programme period, focus shifted on the Special Mobility
            scheme (67) that was revised into a Requalification Scheme, with more emphasis on re-orientation of
            public employees' careers. The implementation of the new Requalification started very late and take-up
            was very limited, far lower than expected.(68) This can be also due to the fact that a number of employees
            in areas of overemployment may have preferred acceding to mutual agreements on contract termination.

            Some rules of public sector employment were revised along the structure of the private labour code.
            Changes included more flexible working time arrangements, less compensation for overtime, fewer
            holidays, elimination of compensatory resting time and new rules of compensation for the termination of
            temporary contracts. The working week was extended from 35 to 40 hours.



            (65) Similar cuts were introduced for local administrations - by a law which benchmarked these positions to the size of the
                 municipalities - and for the region of Madeira – by conditionality of the related economic adjustment programme. According to
                 the SIOE database, the number of high managers at mid-2014 was 16% lower than at end-2011 and the number of middle
                 managers was 12.3% lower. (DG ECFIN, 2014c)
             66
            ( ) Up to February 2014 they attracted a below expectations amount of around 4.000 employees (DG EFIN, 2014b). By end-April
                 2014 about 2,300 contract terminations had been completed.
            (67) The Special Mobility Pool (SMP) is intended for people who are redundant as a result of reorganisation. Under the existing
                 rules, the majority of workers could stay in the SMP (earning 50% of their previous salary and full SSC) until retirement. Usage
                 of SMP has been low due to inappropriate incentives, including the cumbersome evaluation model it entailed. (IMF, 2013a)
            (68) Implementation started in April 2014, with some delay due to negative ruling by the Constitutional Court about disproportionate
                 impact on job security. The new requalification scheme was estimated to involve 12,000 employees in 2014 and 2015. Actual
                 numbers were very disappointing. During the first part of 2015, the number of employees in the requalification scheme and re-
                 employed in other parts of the government increased. (DG ECFIN, 2015b)




60
                                                                                                                                   4. Fiscal policy




Pension expenditures were contained, but not through permanent measures. Since 2011, the
indexation mechanism was suspended, with the exception of the lowest pensions. The government
introduced a temporary Extraordinary Solidarity Contribution (CES) on pensions higher than a threshold.
CES was significantly increased in the course of the programme, until it was reverted in 2015. The
sustainability factor linking the pension value to life expectancy was redesigned. The retirement age was
increased to 66 years in 2014 and will vary according to life expectancy as from 2016. The government
solutions to align the rules for public employees appointed before 2006 (CGA) with those in the general
social security system and to replace Extraordinary Solidarity Contribution (CES) with a structural
Sustainability Contribution were rejected by the Court.(69) Consequently, the comprehensive structural
reform of the pension system, that was needed to decrease the weight of current pensions on public
finances and younger generations, was postponed and has not been adopted yet.(70) In the meantime, the
2012 full suspension of early retirements was lifted in 2015, allowing early retirement through a flexible
regime from the age of 60 (rather than 55).

Spending on non-pension social benefits was reduced, despite rising unemployment and declining
incomes. Further efforts for better targeting would have been warranted. Reforms of the revenue
administration can contribute to the effectiveness of means-testing. While spending on
unemployment benefits increased due to the sharp rise in unemployment, other expenditure on non-
retirement social benefits decreased by more than €2bn (12%), about 1.3% of GDP, during the period
2011-2013. (71) 2/3 of these savings came from sickness/healthcare, which is an area where benefits
continued to be paid without means-testing. The second largest contributor to the overall savings was
'family/children' benefits, with a decrease of more than 15% from 2010 to 2013. In 2013, ¾ of these
benefits were granted after means-testing, but the income threshold could still be more efficient in
excluding non-poor households to the advantage of the poorest (OECD, 2014c). Significant savings were
also made in the 'social exclusion' area, mainly tightening eligibility criteria of the social integration
income (RSI). This impacted on the most vulnerable (see Section 7). At the end of the programme, there
was still room for overall improvement through better targeting, consolidation of fragmented and
overlapping programmes, capping of total benefits received by households (OECD, 2014c). A reform
implemented in 2012 introduced some corrections to unemployment benefits, but the system still featured
low coverage for young workers and relatively high benefits for long periods (IMF, 2013a)

The programme measures were broadly successful in containing health expenditure in a structural
way. The programme measures addressed several areas, including the public health sub-systems of civil
servants, pharmaceuticals' policy, primary care provision and the hospital network. Strong
implementation translated in health public spending falling from 6.8% of GDP in 2010 to 6% in 2014,
while private spending remained at around 3% (OECD data). Tax subsidies to health expenses were
reduced and user charges were increased, while the scope of exemptions from co-payments was extended
to a wider share of the population. A wide array of policies was implemented to reduce public
pharmaceutical expenditure, which fell from 1.35% of GDP in 2011 to slightly above the 1% target,
mainly as a result of reducing prices for patients. The use of generics rose from 35% to more than 45%,
still below the 60% target. Primary care reforms included the reorganisation of health centres (reducing
the use of emergency), promoting electronic medical records and e-prescriptions, use of indicators and
benchmarking to monitor prescription behaviour, publication of clinical guidelines and reduce

(69) In 2013, CGA pensioners represented about 17% of the total number of pensioners (DG EMPL et al, 2015) Besides adapting
     the formula to calculate pensions for future CGA retirees, these new rules included the recalculation of the benefits to current
     CGA retirees. Pensions in payment would have been reduced by about 10%, but the Court rejected these cuts of the CGA
     pensions (see Box 4.2)
(70) The current contributions to the public pension systems cover less than 75% of pension-related expenditure (DG ECFIN,
     2016a). In the framework of the stakeholder consultation, the temporary emergency nature of the adopted measures and the
     absence of a proper reform to ensure sustainability and equity were criticised.
(71) Calculations based on data from the Eurostat database on social protection (data extracted in November 2015). Invalidity
     benefits are considered together with non-retirement social benefits. These data includes social transfers in kind. They
     decreased by more than € 0.5bn, including because of measures introduced in the National Health System (reducing the costs
     for conventions, pharmaceutical subsidies and corporate hospitals). CdF (2013)




                                                                                                                                                 61
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            expenditure on overtime by better organisation. Other part of the health reforms targeted the hospital
            sector, consisting in concentration, specialisation and the reorganisation of services. Overall, the
            programme measures went in the right direction as they had a structural nature and strived for more than
            just short-run expenditure savings, aiming at increasing efficiency and providing more with less.

            Access to health was not put at risk, but some structural problems, in particular relating to the
            hospital sector, are still to be solved. It seems that access to health services has not been dramatically
            affected, although some negative outcomes are reported. Operational losses of hospitals have not been
            fully eliminated (e.g. through their restructuring). The underlying problem of SOE hospitals' financing
            lacked a decisive response and under-budgeting still remains a challenge. (72)

            The restructuring of SOEs was started promptly and reduced expenditure and future contingent
            liabilities for the state. The initial focus was on the 10 companies (in the transport and infrastructure
            sectors) posing the largest potential fiscal risks to the state. The SOEs' restructuring process included
            rationalising services, increasing tariffs and reducing operational costs, in particular with regards to staff
            costs. (73) A 5-year Strategic Plan was put forward for the transport infrastructure sector, which accounted
            for around 75% of the SOEs' debt. In this sector, companies managed to reach operational balance as
            soon as in 2012 (74); after the operational restructuring, the balance-sheets of some negative-equity
            companies have been strengthened by means of state loans and partial conversion of loans into equity.
            Overall, this should lead to a better control of the future debt evolution, which is now also subject to
            explicit ceilings, with ensuing positive effects on the related state's contingent liabilities. At an aggregate
            level at the end of the programme, SOEs were still loss making as assets impairments (also related to the
            legacy derivatives contracts) still weighed on their profitability.

            The renegotiation of the PPP projects was started promptly and generated significant savings in
            current expenditure during and beyond the programme period. After approval of the new framework
            law, restructuring negotiations started for the most significant PPP transport contracts, for the reduction of
            payments to private partners and the resolution of contingent liabilities. The negotiation lines included the
            freezing of investments, the reduction in scope of several contracts, the rationalisation of engineering
            standards and operational expenditure, the suppression of automatic payments for future capital
            expenditure (their substitution with future payments linked to the actual need and performance of
            extraordinary maintenance) and the reduction of the rate of return for the private partner. This was
            justified by the high standards previously included in the tender and the actual level and composition of
            traffic. The initial target was €7bn savings over the projects’ life cycle, in terms of PPP annual payments
            to the private partners (which feeds into public expenditure through intermediate consumption). These
            payments are estimated to start a slow decline in 2017. The renegotiation allowed for about €0.6bn
            savings in 2013-2014. Projects’ life cycle savings are estimated at about €5.3bn, while the process is still
            ongoing. (75) (76) .

            A number of measures to improve the cost-efficiency of the public administration faced
            implementation difficulties. The use of shared services in the areas of financial, human and IT resources
            was delayed beyond the end of the programme. At local level, the reduction of parishes became effective


            (72) Stakeholder consultation and DG ECFIN (2016a)
            (73) Employment downsizing was one of the main features of the operating restructuring in many SOEs. It is possible that in a
                 number of SOEs, underlying structural problems have not been fully addressed, but an in-depth assessment of specific SOEs
                 goes beyond the scope of this overall evaluation.
            (74) In terms of EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation) after adjusting for the severance packages
                 related to the reduction in staff. In 2014, EBITDA decreased because of a drop in the turnover (including the decline in
                 subsidies granted by the government), and an increase in fair value reductions and impairment losses of both commercial debt
                 and assets (also related with complex derivative contracts that are being contested in court).
            (75) For €3.3bn out of these €5.3bn savings, the process is still pending. Three additional contracts are at different stages of
                 negotiation and can add to these savings, with further progress towards the €7bn initial target.
            (76) At the end of 2015, claims from private partners amounted to about €2bn (similar to the level at the end of 2012). This is not to
                 be interpreted as the expected actual impact, as the latter is very often lower than the initial amounts petitioned (UTAP, 2015)




62
                                                                                                                                4. Fiscal policy




for the local elections in September 2013, but generated some discontent among the population. (77) The
new legal provision for creating inter-municipal communities to exploit synergies in managing common
services was approved, but experienced a very limited take-up. The reorganisation of decentralised
services of ministries was based on the Aproximar concept. The latter implied the creation of one-stop-
shops, covering more efficient geographical areas, ensuring the integration of services, relying on the use
of digital government. Opening of the 'Aproximar' branches was delayed and started after the end of the
programme. In 2012, the framework law for the creation and functioning of foundations by the central
and local administrations was approved. The initial objective of preparing by 2011 a cost/benefit analysis
of all public and quasi-public entities was ambitious. With delays, this was done for foundations,
generating some savings in 2014. In 2013, a new legal obligation to regularly report on benefits granted
by the public administration to the private sector was introduced. (78) Then, the review of public financial
support to private associations was started.

4.2.3. Getting a broader and deeper control of fiscal dynamics

Strengthening Portugal’s fiscal framework was a complex and long process. A Reform Unit,
supported by the technical assistance from the IMF, was set-up by the Ministry of Finance in view of the
reform of the Budgetary Framework law. During the programme, the 2011 Law was amended four times
to transpose the EU requirements for budgetary frameworks of the Member States (Directive 85/2011),
the Six-Pack and the Fiscal Compact. (79) This contributed to delay the broader reform of the budgetary
framework law, which was eventually postponed until after the end of the programme. The Fiscal Council
was set-up and made operational in 2012. At the level of regions and municipalities, the new legislation
on financial management was approved in September 2013, strengthening the monitoring and reporting
requirements as well as coordination across levels of government. A Municipality Support Fund and a
resolution mechanism for local bodies have been set-up. This should support stability and proper ex-ante
risk assessment in future lending decisions.

The programme improved the control over the dynamics of central PPPs and SOEs. New initiatives
were stopped until a comprehensive assessment of the ensuing fiscal risks was concluded and translated
into a better institutional framework. As for the PPPs, in 2012, a new legal framework was put into place
to reinforce the role of the Ministry of Finance over the PPP project cycle, to set up a new technical unit
(UTAP) and eventually to improve control over the fiscal outcomes of these contracts. As for SOEs, in
2013, a new legal framework was put in place to improve SOE's financial planning and debt management
(Decree-law 133/2013, changed by Law 75/A/2014). It was followed by the set-up of a new technical unit
(UTAM), in the Ministry of Finance, which – in its role of shareholder – was tasked to oversee from a
centralized perspective the activities of central SOEs. However, before the end of the programme, the
government did not make enough progress in monitoring SOEs and PPPs owned or operated at local
level. (DG ECFIN, 2016a).

Significant progress has been made in settling arrears. The Commitment Control Law (CCL) was
approved in 2012 and aimed at limiting additional build-up of arrears by linking commitments to
available funds and allowing for a better control of the budget execution. Arrears decreased significantly
in 2012 and 2013 (Graph 4.1), in particular thanks to the special settlement programmes. However, in the
health sector, net of these programmes (worth about €1.9bn) the stock of arrears kept on increasing. At
the beginning of 2014, programme conditionality required some technical adjustments to the Law so as to
bring to zero the net accumulation of arrears (DG ECFIN, 2014a). A dedicated unit, within the Ministry
of Finance, in charge of the expenditure arrears for the public sector has then been set-up.


(77) The new government is re-assessing the merger of parishes. (DG ECFIN 2016a)
(78) The total amount of public grants in Portugal in 2014 has been about €4.4 bn to about 50.000 beneficiaries, of which about
     €0.9bn to more than 5.700 private associations. The Inspectorate for Finances is competent for supervision and control of the
     activities of beneficiaries.
(79) Law 41/2014, 10 July, published in Diário da República, 1.ª série — N.º 131 — 10 de julho de 2014




                                                                                                                                              63
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                      5000   € mln.            Graph 4.1: Domestic arrears
                                      4500
                                      4000
                                      3500
                                      3000
                                      2500
                                      2000
                                      1500
                                      1000
                                       500
                                         0



                                             Health Sectort and SOEs hospitals      Local Government
                                             Regional Government                    Other

                                      Source: PT authorities


            4.2.4. Flanking the revenue effort

            The tax administration properly developed and implemented the 2012-2014 strategic plan. This
            listed a wide array of measures to combat tax fraud and evasion, to strengthen audit and enforce
            collection based on risk management techniques. The plan included measures to improve rules for
            fighting tax evasion in the presence of complex cases. E-invoicing was introduced to provide the revenue
            administration with key information to check compliance. A large taxpayers unit was established, for all
            issues concerning this key segment. Other measures included specific risk analyses and the expansion of
            the sources of information for cross-checking. Auditing methodologies were developed. (80)

            The implementation of organisational changes in the tax administration was overall satisfactory. In
            2012, the tax, customs and IT services were integrated in one single administration, whose set-up
            benefitted from technical assistance. The reduction of local tax branches (cut by 50%) faced significant
            implementation difficulties, also in view of implications in terms of logistics and human resources
            mobility. It was delayed until after programme expiration as this measure was embedded in the overall
            rationalisation of all public services provided at local level (Aproximar programme – see Section 4.2.2).
            Towards the end the programme period, the MoU included the creation of a Taxpayer Services
            Department, which was established in 2014, with the aim of centralising services and improving
            relationship with taxpayers. The cost of collection ratio significantly decreased during the programme, at
            least partly due to the PIT reform. The ratio between tax administration expenditure and GDP improved,
            reaching in 2013 the lowest value since at least 2005. (81)

            More could have been done to ensure that the increase in the number of tax auditors would
            translate in more and better audits. The objective of increasing resources for auditing was postponed
            and achieved only after expiration of the programme, through the recruitment of 1000 auditors. During
            2011-2013, statistics about verification activities did not improve, including for large taxpayers. (82)
            Increasing the number of auditors is not sufficient to ensure a proportional increase of the auditing
            capabilities, especially for the most complex verifications targeting large taxpayers and HNWI. Even if
            some references to measures to improve quality were included in the 2012-2014 strategic plan, the
            programme could have requested a specific plan to improve capability for complex cases, especially in


            (80) MdF (2011). Information about measures that have been implemented is based on GovP (2015). In the framework of the
                 stakeholder consultation, it was mentioned that the reform of the revenue administration was a positive development.
            (81) The cost of collection ratio decreased from 1.55 in 2010 to 0.99 in 2013. The ratio between tax administration expenditure and
                 GDP decreased from 0.258 in 2010 to 0.226 in 2013. OECD (2015a), pages 181, 182
            (82) OECD (2015a), pages 191, 219-221. The large taxpayers unit was established in January 2012 and in 2013 had a ratio
                 staff/large taxpayers of 1/5. In 2013, large companies represented 44% of total revenue collections.




64
                                                                                                                                4. Fiscal policy




view of this massive recruitment of new auditors. This would have induced strong and specific
monitoring. Another premise to effective audits is that auditors are granted adequate powers.(83) An
analysis to identify possible gaps in terms of investigative powers, such as access to information during
verifications, might have led to build the case for tailored changes in legislation.

It was appropriate to enhance the fight against tax non-compliance through the availability and
integration of more information. Risk analysis was strengthened, but more resources could have
been beneficial. During 2013, new information was made available to the revenue administration,
through unified forms covering both social contributions and withholding taxes and thanks to the
introduction of e-invoicing. In 2013, while gradually phasing in a modern approach to compliance
management, the authorities started the analysis of compliance risks associated to different economic
sectors and categories of taxpayers. This analysis was delayed and was still ongoing at the time of the last
review. In parallel, two pilot compliance improvement projects were started for self-employed
professionals and HNWI. (84) These two projects were taken over by the new Risk Assessment Unit that
became operational in 2014, with a limited amount of staff. More upfront and bolder development of the
risk analysis function, possibly including the recruitment of specialised professionals and the
centralisation of most of the available analysts, might have been beneficial both to streamlining the quest
for new, better, more integrated information and to timely improving taxpayers' selection.

The performance of the measures to increase the efficiency of the tax court system was mixed. There
was no clear and stable decrease in the number of pending case. (85) Furthermore, during the period 2012-
2014, despite the activity of a special task force of judges, tax cases worth above €1 million increased by
9% and their value climbed by 50%.(86) The creation of special permanent chambers for large tax cases
had initially been envisaged by the programme, but then submitted to the assessment of the experience
with the task force, which was still active at the end of 2015. The authorities presented a plan to
reorganise the state's representation in the tax courts, to improve the success ratio, which actually
increased. The publication of statistics on recovery rates, duration and costs of tax cases was not
achieved. In general, at the expiration of the programme, the IT system of the tax courts was not working
properly yet and this was still hindering efficient management of workload and performance on the basis
of reliable statistics.


4.3.    OVERALL OUTCOME AND ASSESSMENT

The evolution of the 'budget net of one-offs' points to a closure of the deficit that was slower than
envisaged. The budget balance net of one-offs closed by 1.3pp of GDP in both 2011 and 2012, by 0.7pp
in 2013 and 1.9pp in 2014 (Table 4.4). However, the 2012 cut was driven by the abolition of the 13th and
14th monthly pensions and public salaries which were de facto turned into one-offs by the Constitutional
Court (see Box 4.2). If these are counted as a 2012 one-offs, a much more back-loaded profile stands out,
with most of the closure in the budget deficit shifting to 2013 and 2014, when consolidation became more
revenue-based.

Overall, the consolidation effort turned out to be more revenue-based than initially projected. The
programme envisaged consolidation measures on the revenue side worth €3.5bn in 2011, €1.5bn in 2012
and €1bn in 2013. However, budgeted consolidation revenue measures turned out to amount to €5.5bn in


(83) The Government was just required to submit to Parliament a law to strengthen the auditing and enforcement powers of the
     central tax administration to exercise control over the whole territory of Portugal.
(84) In 2013, the revenue administration devoted only 3 staff members for a population of 191 HNWIs. (OECD 2015a).
(85) After being quite stable during the programme, in 2014 the number of pending cases increased by more than 10%, mainly
     because of a surge in new cases.
(86) http://www.cstaf.pt/Paginas/Estatistica-Processual.aspx . Calculations based on CSTAF (2011-2014). As mentioned later, the IT
     system of the tax courts is not working properly yet. This may affect the reliability of statistics. See also stakeholder
     consultation (Annex 1).




                                                                                                                                              65
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            2011, €3bn in in 2012 and €4bn in 2013. This was mainly due to significant VAT and PIT reforms. The
            latter implied a strong departure from the aim of the programme, which was to focus revenue measures on
            indirect taxes, while making the corporate income tax more growth friendly. The change in composition
            of fiscal consolidation is reflected in the evolution of structural revenue and expenditure (Table 4.6).

            As a permanent expenditure cut was not secured, the structural balance achieved at the end of the
            programme was not solid. The structural balance moved from -8% of GDP in 2010 to -1.4% in 2014,
            which meant a fiscal effort of 6.6% (Table 4.6), broadly in line with the overall improvement requested
            under the EDP procedure for the same period. (87) Nevertheless, at programme exit, more than 1pp of the
            overall fiscal effort was exposed to high risk of reversal without proper replacement, due to the use of
            semi-temporary measures, in particular on the expenditure side. European Commission's 2016 Spring
            forecast indicated that the structural and structural primary balances deteriorated in 2015 and risked
            deteriorating further in the absence of adequate measures (Table 4.6). As fiscal consolidation tilted
            towards revenues, which consumed available tax space, it would be important to progress with permanent
            cuts to expenditure, as this tends to be more durable and growth-friendly in the long term (Wöhlbier,
            2014). This is particularly the case of Portugal, where government expenditure can still be made more
            efficient.

             Table 4.6:
             Structural Balance    (% of potential GDP at current prices – ESA-2010)

                                                    2010        2011         2012       2013         2014         2015        2016        2017
             Structural Revenues                                42.1         42.5       44.3         44.5         43.7         43.8       43.3
             Structural Expenditures                            48.3         45.6       46.8         45.9         45.7         46.0       45.8
             Structural balance                      -8.0       -6.2         -3.1       -2.5         -1.4         -2.0         -2.2       -2.5
             Fiscal effort                                       1.8          3.1        0.6          1.1         -0.6         -0.2       -0.3
             Structural primary balance              -5.1       -1.9          1.8        2.3          3.5          2.6          2.2        1.7
             Fiscal adjustment                                   3.2          3.7        0.5          1.2         -0.9         -0.4       -0.5
             Source: Ameco 2016 Spring forecast (May 2016)


            Gross public debt peaked in 2014. The primary balance continued to contribute to the increase in public
            debt, but in the second half of the programme this was mainly due to one-off support to the banking
            sector. (88) However, as it might be expected at a time of negative growth, the largest contributor to the
            increase in debt was the difference between the growth rate of the economy and the debt interest expenses
            (snowball effect). The return of economic growth, the reduction of the official debt interest margins and
            the accommodative monetary policy have resulted in the snowball effect turning more benign. (89)
            Despite this improvement, Portugal is the only country in the euro area forecast by the Commission
            services to still have a debt-increasing snowball effect in 2017, with the exception of Italy. The stock-
            flow adjustments played a significant role in the increase of public debt in 2011 and 2012, including due
            to loans to Greece and Ireland and the accumulation of cash buffer.(90) In 2014, the repayment of CoCo
            bonds by BCP and BPI contributed to mitigate the impact on debt of the primary balance and the
            snowball effect. Public debt peaked at 130.2% of GDP in 2014 and started decreasing in 2015, including



            (87) Council Recommendations on 2/10/2012 and 18/6/2013 with a view to bringing an end to the situation of an excessive
                 government deficit in Portugal.
            (88) Primary balance includes support to the banking sector, which was not accounted when assessing compliance with the fiscal
                 targets. In 2014, the cost of the resolution of BES contributed about 3% of GDP to the primary balance.
            (89) The EFSM margin was 215 bps (Council Implementing Decision of 30 May 2011 on granting Union financial assistance to
                 Portugal     2011/344/EU)        while     the   EFSF      margin     was    208    bps    (Banco      de     Portugal,   2011a,
                 www.efsf.europa.eu/attachments/faq_en.pdf). After debt sustainability and the financing situation in Greece deteriorated,
                 official lenders decided to remove margins. To maintain the principle of equal treatment, the same policy was applied to Ireland
                 and Portugal. On the 11th of October 2011, the Council decided to cancel the interest margins initially carried by the EFSM and
                 EFSF loans. Ceteris paribus, continued application of these margins would have implied, in accrual terms, additional costs for
                 Portugal that can be estimated to exceed € 2.5bn during the period 2011-2014.
            (90) The accumulation of deposits reflected the unused 'programme' loans allocated to banking recapitalisation, the transfer of banks'
                 pension funds, as well as advances in the context of privatisations.




66
                                                                                                                                    4. Fiscal policy




due to use of cash reserves to finance early repayments to IMF (Graph 4.2). (91) (CdF, 2015a) Net of
government deposits, public debt increased also in 2015 from 120 to 121.4% of GDP. (IMF, 2016).

                                         Graph 4.2: Gross Government Debt Developments
                               20    % GDP                                                        % GDP     140
                                                                                                            120
                               15
                                                                                                            100
                               10                                                                           80

                                5                                                                           60
                                                                                                            40
                                0
                                                                                                            20
                               -5                                                                           0
                                      10        11      12       13       14       15        16     17
                                             Primary balance                             Snowball effect
                                             Stock-flow adjustment                       Gross public debt (rhs)
                               Source: European Commission 2016 Spring forecast (May 2016)




Privatization proceeds achieved their target and allowed a reduction of the debt and the ensuing
contingent liabilities for the state. Under the programme, the target of €5bn privatisation receipts was
achieved, reducing the public debt accordingly. Privatizations allow the state to capitalize the present
value of the expected future income generated by the companies that are sold. This implies that the state
renounces to potential future dividends. (92) However, it also removes the related contingent liabilities for
the state and can result in improved management of these companies. In Portugal, privatizations have
reduced the government perimeter, but they could have been accompanied by stronger reforms of the
sectors, (93) so as to ensure higher competition and higher efficiency in the future, with positive effects on
the whole economy. The privatization process attracted direct investments, from a diverse pool of
international investors, in a variety of sectors, such as utilities, airport, postal, and insurance services, at a
time where companies were experiencing difficulties to finance investments. (94) Some large
privatisations were not implemented by the end of the programme. These included the national airline
TAP and the cargo rail company CP Carga. (95)

The consolidation of some corporates' liabilities in the general government perimeter should favour
better control of the future dynamics of the public debt. However risks can still materialize from
high contingent liabilities. The ESA-2010 reclassification of SOEs’ liabilities led to an increase in
general government debt, but also reduced uncertainty on its prospective trajectory, as the dynamics of
these non-financial SOEs are now fully considered within the budget process. At the end of 2014,
liabilities of non-financial entities controlled by central and local government, but still classified outside
the general government perimeter, amounted to 3.6% (96) and 0.9% of GDP respectively and about half of

(91) In addition it must be considered that in 2012 and 2013, Social security funds sold assets of other OECD states and bought
     Portuguese public debt, bringing the relative weight of the latter to 55% of their portfolio. This contributed to the decrease in
     the consolidated public debt, because debts between entities within the perimeter are not considered. The Portuguese authorities
     intend to bring this weight to 90%. (CdF, 2014a) These purchases bring forward the debt-reducing stock-flow adjustment that is
     generated by the sale of foreign assets and reduce portfolio diversification.
(92) The multiples - calculated as ratio of the proceeds on EBITDA - have been broadly in line with those of comparable companies
     in other geographies. This is an indicator of the success of the process.
(93) Some reforms were however implemented, in the transport, infrastructure, water and sewerage bulk service management
     sectors, as for example the framework law for the national regulatory authorities (NRAs). See Section 5.
(94) In the framework of the stakeholder consultation, it was however mentioned that the privatisations were not led by a clear
     strategy and were not decided in the context of effective social dialogue.
(95) After an earlier attempt failed in 2012, TAP was privatised, but, after the programme, the new government regained control.
     The privatisation of CARGA was concluded by the new government. (DG ECFIN, 2016a)
(96) With reference to central government, this represented an increase from 2013, when this amounted to 3.44% of GDP.




                                                                                                                                                  67
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            them were owed by loss-making units. The liabilities of financial entities controlled by (and outside the
            perimeter of) the general government were far higher at about 74.8% of GDP, the highest value in the EU
            and on a steep rise with respect to 2013 (47.3%). The amount of general government one-off guarantees
            approximated 7.1% of GDP (decreasing with respect to 2013, when it was 13.3%). With regards to PPPs,
            the potential impact in case government would have to take over the assets slightly decreased to 4.8% of
            GDP. This was still the highest in the EU. (97)

            Besides being exposed to contingent liabilities, the debt trajectory is particularly vulnerable to a
            loosening of fiscal discipline and negative economic developments. Continued fiscal consolidation
            and sustained growth are essential to put debt on a clear downward slope. In 2015, public debt was
            still very high (the third highest in the EU). It is expected to decline moderately, on the back of favourable
            interest rates, continued economic recovery, expected structural primary surpluses (1.4% of GDP) and
            debt-reducing operations. (98) This trajectory is still vulnerable to macro-economic and financial market
            shocks. In case of a structural primary surplus at 0.9% of GDP (99), public debt is projected to stabilise at
            a high level, without a clear downward path. In this scenario, shocks to nominal growth and interest rates
            could more easily put the debt on an unsustainable trajectory. Continued fiscal consolidation - including
            to address past shortcomings in terms of a durable improvement of the structural balance - and the
            effectiveness of structural reforms in sustaining growth and rebalancing the economy to the tradable
            sector remain crucial to put debt on a clear downward path. (100)

            After the end of the programme, the unwinding of some of the main measures is posing additional
            fiscal risks. The new single supplement wage scale proposed under the programme, never entered into
            force, as the new government is reassessing it. After being reduced during the programme, public staff
            already increased in 2015. The three sectors with the largest growth were education, health and
            transportation. (101) Further pressure may come from the decision of the new government to return to the
            35 hours working week. One of the tools introduced during the programme to support redeployment of
            public staff in relation to the real needs - the requalification scheme - was frozen with the re-integration of
            the first set of employees that were bound to be dismissed because they had not found a new job in public
            administration one year after their previous job was discontinued. Concerning privatisations, the new
            government cancelled the award of important urban transport concessions. These policy reversals have
            been occurring while Portugal is subject to Post Programme Surveillance (PPS).

            Significant progress in fiscal governance has been achieved after the expiration of the programme,
            but weaknesses remain. Improvements in the fiscal rules and medium-term budgetary framework had
            moved Portugal to an average position within the EU (Graph 4.3a and 4.3b) by the end of the programme.
            In particular, control over the dynamics of central PPPs and SOEs improved. However, as the
            comprehensive reform of the budgetary framework law had not been implemented, weaknesses with
            regard to accounting fragmentation across different levels of government, commitment controls and fiscal
            risks from local SOEs and PPPs were still recorded. (102) Finally, in July 2015, the new Budget


            (97) Calculations based on DGTF (2015) and Eurostat data (consultation April 2016)
            (98) DG ECFIN 2016a. This debt sustainability analysis was carried out in April 2016 and uses the Commission's 2016 Winter
                  forecast as a starting point and takes into account the 0.5% of GDP in additional structural fiscal consolidation measures
                  announced by the government on the 5th of February 2016. Graph 4.2 is based on the following 2016 Spring forecast. From the
                  Winter to the Spring forecast, projections concerning the primary balance improved (from 1.2 to 1.8% of GDP for 2016 and
                  from 0.9 to 2.0% for 2017) and projections concerning the stock-flow adjustment improved for 2016 (from -0.1 to -2.0% of
                  GDP), but worsened for 2017 (from -0.9 to 0.2%):
            (99) European Commission (2016). The debt sustainability analysis carried out around the end of 2014 just after programme exit
                  was based on a structural primary fiscal balance at 2.1% of GDP (DG ECFIN, 2014d).
            (100) See public debt sustainability analysis in IMF (2016) and DG ECFIN (2016a).
            (101) DG ECFIN, 2016a
            (102) IMF, 2014c. Following prioritisation of the transport sector, not enough was done by the end of the programme to ensure
                  adequate supervision of local and regional level PPPs and PPPs in the water/sewerage/waste businesses (European Commission,
                  2016). SOEs' operating balance fell short of the budget 2015 forecast by 25%. This slippage is mainly explained by state-owned
                  hospitals. (DG ECFIN, 2016a). See also stakeholder consultation (Annex 1).




68
                                                                                                                                                                                                             4. Fiscal policy




Framework Law (BFL) was reformed and other laws were introduced (103), with the aim of addressing
outstanding vulnerabilities, but implementation is expected to take several years. Significant expenditure
slippages still occurred in 2015. With reference to arrears, amendments to the Commitment Control Law
were introduced in March 2015 (Law 22/2015). Pressure remained high in 2015 when the recapitalisation
operation of state-owned hospitals only translated into a less than expected reduction of the stock. Non-
compliance with the Late Payments Directive (which set 60 days for overdue payments as from mid-
2013) is also an important outstanding issue.

                                 Graph 4.3a: The strength of fiscal frameworks                                                                      Graph 4.3b: FRI and structural government balances
                                                                                                                                                                for euro-area member states
                              1.5                                                                                                                                       4




                                                                                             avg. Structural Balance 2005-2010 (% of GDP)
  MTBF index (standardised)




                              1.0                                                                                                                                      2
                                                             PT
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                              0.5

                                                                                                                                                                       -2
                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                       -4
                              -0.5
                                                                                                                                                               PT      -6
                                                     PT
                              -1.0
                                                                             Dec-14                                                                                    -8

                              -1.5                                            Dec-10                                                                                  -10
                                     -1.5   -1.0     -0.5      0.0      0.5     1.0    1.5                                                   -1.5       -1     -0.5         0   0.5      1       1.5     2
                                              Fiscal Rule Index (standardised)
                                                                                                                                                              avg. Fiscal Rule Index 2000-2010
 Source: European Commission                                                                                                                Source: European Commission


The originally planned consolidation path and the subsequent flexibility of the programme partners
were both broadly appropriate. The fiscal consolidation path that was set at the start of the programme
can be considered ambitious, but was required in light of the debt dynamics (see Section 4.1). The
programme partners gradually accepted a less frontloaded consolidation path, as Portugal's access to the
sovereign debt market increased, also on the back of the more accommodative monetary policy and
improved official lending terms. With hindsight, it can be concluded that a more gradual consolidation
path than that originally planned would have been sustainable. However, given the information available
at the time, the originally planned consolidation path was appropriate and the programme partners'
subsequent acceptance of greater flexibility was pertinent. (104)

A more balanced composition of consolidation during the first half of the programme would have
been more efficient if coupled with stronger progress in structural reforms on the expenditure side.
Portugal was nearly constantly under the Excessive Deficits Procedure (EDP) from 2002. There was a
need for cuts to inefficient expenditure. A programme tilted towards expenditure-based consolidation
could help building credibility. Nevertheless, it was not appropriate to frontload expenditure cuts in the
absence of ongoing reforms of the public sector that could have allowed delivering such substantial
savings in the short term. Relying on temporary expenditure measures proved inefficient. They did not
lead to the ultimately envisaged permanent savings, while they arguably contributed to the weak
economic performance early in the programme. Given the planned consolidation path, more revenue
based fiscal consolidation, at the beginning of the programme, would have allowed more time to design
appropriate expenditure measures to be implemented by the end of the programme. This could have also
reduced the risk of negative rulings by the Constitutional Court, in a context of high uncertainty about the
outcome of its scrutiny on complex and controversial structural reforms, such as the reform of the pension
system. Nevertheless, this more revenue-based approach should still have been accompanied by strong
plans and monitoring on the needed reforms to ensure that expenditure inefficiencies were properly
addressed.


(103) Law 15/2015, Decree-Law 92/2015
(104) In the framework of the stakeholder consultation, the issue of the pace of fiscal consolidation emerged as particularly
      controversial .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           69
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            The absence of a reform of the state, underpinned by an exhaustive spending review, weighed on
            the capability to achieve consistent and sustained savings. The initial MoU did not contain the
            requirement to set an overall vision of the state reform. The latter was only set out by the Portuguese
            authorities in October 2013, in very broad terms and without any practical follow-up. A comprehensive
            reform of the public administration would have helped achieving permanent savings in the public wage
            bill while safeguarding the effectiveness of public services and attracting and retaining people with the
            necessary skills (see also Section 4.2.2). A reform of social security could have allowed durable savings
            while minimizing distortive effects on equity and growth. Besides facilitating sustainable savings,
            rethinking the role of the state could have ultimately contributed to address the structural weaknesses of
            the Portuguese economy. (105)

            Programme design could have better envisaged the need to develop an overall vision of the state
            reform, to foster political consensus and sustained ownership on medium and long term objectives.
            The existence of a clear plan for a comprehensive reform of the state and an in-depth spending review
            could have helped optimise the selection of the measures to be included in the programme. The plan
            could have come and been presented to the stakeholders at the very beginning of the programme period so
            as to steer and frame the ensuing fiscal effort. It could have been immediately followed by further
            analysis to single out a few reforms on which political capital and administrative capacity should have
            been invested as a matter of priority. (106) For these reforms, detailed implementation plans should have
            become part of the MoU and a clear reference for strong monitoring. In order to address possible
            constraints in administrative capacity, the use of technical assistance could have been considered.




            (105) In the framework of the stakeholder consultation, the need for a deep reform of the state, including a civil service reform, and
                  comprehensive spending review were mentioned. The plan for a reform of the state came too late and was not streamlined and
                  detailed enough. A consolidation with fewer cuts in the short term and a larger reduction in the medium/long term would have
                  been preferable. Another view is that the programme approach was justified by the need to intervene quickly in a climate of
                  urgency combined with the limited duration of the programme.
            (106) A number of measures included in the programme - such as the use of shared services, re-organisation of local government and
                  decentralised services of ministries, cost/benefit analysis of public and quasi-public entities - could rely on the authorities'
                  ownership, but were arguably not the most important to induce the necessary change to public finances dynamics and still faced
                  implementation difficulties, absorbing precious administrative capacity and sometimes political capital.




70
5.            STRUCTURAL REFORMS


5.1.    KEY CHALLENGES AND PROGRAMME DESIGN

Given deep-rooted economic problems that caused the accumulation of imbalances over a long
period of time, structural reforms were a key pillar of the Portuguese programme. Chronic
structural deficiencies were at the heart of Portugal's weak economic performance preceding the crisis,
and of the feeble outlook for potential growth. These weaknesses included a lack of adequate human
capital, poorly functioning labour markets, declining labour cost competitiveness, inefficiencies in
product markets characterised by excessive economic rents in many non-tradable sectors, an inefficient
judicial system, malfunctioning housing market and deficiencies in the business environment.

Portugal made limited real progress in structural reforms in the years before the programme,
despite consistent messages on the need for deep reforms. In response to low post-2000 growth, the
need for structural reforms had become central to discussions on Portugal's economic future. The
obstacles to growth set out above had been clearly identified by successive Portuguese administrations,
academics and other external experts. External policy advice (107) typically called for structural reforms to
foster economic growth and correct macro-economic imbalances. The implementation of effective
reforms was, however, very patchy.

The design of the programme benefitted to an extent from advance preparations and existing
reform processes. As Portugal's situation deteriorated, the Portuguese authorities and different parts of
the Commission had worked to draw up potential structural reforms. In March 2011, Portugal submitted a
National Reform Programme (NRP) to the European Commission (108) and a tripartite agreement was
signed between the government, employers and trade unions. Many of the structural measures planned in
those works were integrated into the programme MoU, signed in May 2011. Thus, this advanced works
helped most parts of the MoU related to structural reforms to be quite detailed from the start. But it still
took Portugal and the creditors time to find common ground on what the scope and ambition of structural
reforms in the programme should be.

The programme included a comprehensive package of structural reforms in light of the many
structural weaknesses and inefficiencies. This Section reviews the design, implementation and impact
of these reforms, which besides being numerous, often targeted complex issues that take time to fully
address. The structural measures encompassed two main areas:

• First, policies to enhance flexibility in the use of labour and reduce wage costs. This included
  changes to employment protection legislation, working hours, unemployment benefits, wage-setting
  mechanisms, active labour market policies, vocational training and tertiary education; and

• Second, policies to remove distortions to investment allocation: this includes product market
  reforms in goods and services markets aimed at increasing competition and taking excess rents out of
  protected sectors; also reforms aimed at improving the framework conditions such as measures to
  reduce the cost of doing business, reforms of the judicial system, the improvement of public
  procurement processes, the enforcement of competition law and the reforms of the housing market.

The extensive package of structural reforms in the MoU reflected the broad-based economic
inefficiencies and distortions at the root of the crisis. The Portuguese programme included numerous
and deep structural measures that touched on all the main policy areas, rather than focusing on a few
targeted macro-critical issues. This was because the Portuguese crisis reflected broad-based economic



(107) See for example OECD (2010).
(108) Portugal 2020 – National Reform Programme. http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/nrp/nrp_portugal_en.pdf




                                                                                                                71
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            inefficiencies, unlike in some other countries where the problems were concentrated in a few sectors, like
            housing and/or the financial sector.

            Structural reforms were meant to be frontloaded. The initial programme MoU stated that structural
            reforms would be frontloaded, but there was no specific target on the sequencing between labour market
            and product market reforms. Studies of structural reform implementation have suggested it may be better
            if product market reforms precede labour market reforms, or at least happen in parallel. (109) There is also
            an argument that when a period of internal devaluation is required, there is a strong case to reform fast,
            rather than gradually, so that the internal devaluation takes place more quickly. Given the relatively short
            three-year programme horizon, and the importance of making good progress early, the programme
            partners were focused more on the overall degree of frontloading than on the sequencing of the reforms.

            The programme partners expected that the impact of this broad package of structural reforms on
            potential growth would be gradual. The long-term benefits of structural reforms are broadly accepted.
            In contrast the effects on short-term growth are less clear and driven by opposing set of forces. (110) The
            macroeconomic scenario in the original Portuguese programme cautiously assumed that the effects of
            structural conditionality on potential growth would be marginal in the short-term, while they should bring
            long lasting benefits in the longer term, including a sustained reorientation of activity towards tradable
            sectors. (111) During the programme further analysis became available on the micro-level impact of
            different structural reforms in Portugal, which informed the programme's evolution. (112)


            5.2.    REFORMING THE LABOUR MARKET TO CREATE JOBS AND HELP REBALANCE THE ECONOMY

            The programme tackled long-standing problems with the labour market and skills that had been
            brought into sharper focus by the crisis. The biggest issues that Portugal faced prior to the programme
            were: excessive employment protection of permanent contracts, leading to dualism; uneven access to
            unemployment benefits; rigid working-time arrangements; inflexible and sometimes excessive wages,
            linked to sector-wide wage extension of collective agreements; inadequate active labour market policies
            and vocational training; and low skill levels. The impact of the crisis added a further challenge –
            reallocation and reskilling of labour. These rigidities, skills gaps and weak cost-competitiveness
            hampered effective adjustment and made the impact of the crisis on the labour market larger, more
            persistent, and arguably more unfair that would have been the case in a more flexible economy.

            At a high level the programme covered the right areas, but it was a challenge to fully address in a
            three year programme a reform agenda of the breadth and depth that Portugal needed. The labour
            market reforms in the programme aimed to bring down unemployment and help Portugal to rebalance its
            economy and regain external competitiveness. This meant action to facilitate the reallocation of labour
            (and other resources) and to better align pay with productivity. The reforms to labour market regulation
            were front-loaded in comparison to other structural reforms. Reforms to secondary education were also
            included in the programme although the payoff is more long term.

            The measures in the programme built on existing agreements between the Portuguese government
            and social partners, which were then updated in 2012. The MoU specified that reforms in labour and
            social security legislation would be implemented after consultation of social partners, taking into account

            (109) This is because the effects of product market reforms (in particular lower mark-ups and expanded investment) can mitigate the
                  adverse short-term effects that (necessary) labour market reforms can have on employment and wages. Blanchard, O., Giavazzi,
                  F. (2003).
             110
            ( ) One aspect is contractionary, as reforms lead to lower prices and higher real interest rates. This may postpone consumption and
                  investment decisions and lead to GDP contraction (especially when monetary policy is at the lower bound). The other set of
                  forces is expansionary, as reforms raise expectations of permanent income, so that firms bring forward investment and
                  households consumption.
            (111) DG ECFIN (2011a)
            (112) See for example, Monteagudo et al (2012)




72
                                                                                                                          5. Structural reforms




possible constitutional implications, and in respect of EU Directives and Core Labour Standards. As
noted above, many of the measures in the MoU were based on a March 2011 tripartite agreement (113).
This agreement was updated in January 2012 (114), during the programme. The Tripartite agreements
effectively set the parameters for the changes to labour market regulation that were possible under the
programme. The reforms in the programme involved compromises, and in some cases their design was
not ideal or their scope could have been wider. But in the context of Portugal's social and political system,
overall these Tripartite agreements were a positive factor for programme ownership and success, and for
limiting the level of industrial action during the programme.

5.2.1. Labour market reforms

Wage Setting
An inflexible wage bargaining system led to an erosion of external competitiveness and limited
adjustment capacity in a context of very weak productivity growth. Although overall wage growth
was not especially rapid before the crisis, nominal Unit Labour Costs (ULCs) increased significantly in
the pre-crisis period in a context of very weak productivity growth (see Section 2). Higher wage outcomes
for protected "insiders" were partially masked by the downward pressure on average wages exerted by the
growth of often low paid temporary employment. Portugal had a particularly high level of downward
nominal wage rigidity (115), and relatively high wages in the non-tradable and public sectors. When the
crisis hit, this limited the downward adjustment of real wage costs in response to rising unemployment,
and hindered the scope for a shift in resources towards tradable sectors. As a result, in Portugal (unlike for
example in Ireland) substantive structural reforms were necessary to facilitate an improvement in cost-
competitiveness.

The measures in the programme sought to ensure that in future private sector labour cost
developments would enable firms to be competitive and create jobs. The MoU did not envisage a cut
in the minimum wage but it did entail the cancellation of previous government plans for further increases
and stated that any future minimum wage increases should be compatible with the economic and labour
market situation. The measures in the programme also sought to increase firm-level wage flexibility by
reviewing the criteria for the extension of collective agreements across a sector, and the size limits to firm
level negotiations. As set out below Portugal's Constitution and institutional set up influenced the type of
reforms that were feasible.

The minimum wage was frozen during the programme, but sharp increases before the crisis hit
meant its coverage was already quite high. The minimum wage for full time workers was frozen at
€485 per month (in 14 payments per year) throughout the programme, but as Graph 5.1a shows it did rise
sharply in the years before the programme. The minimum wage rose from €485 to €505 in October 2014,
after the end of the programme, and to €530 in January 2016. Since 2006 the total increase in the
minimum wage has outpaced that of average wages (Graph 5.1b). As a result the proportion of all
workers earning the minimum wage rose from 4% in 2006 to 11% at the start of the programme, 13% at
the end of the programme and 21% in April 2015 (Graph 5.1a). Coverage of the minimum wage is now
quite high in comparison with other European countries. (116) Before the increases that took place in the
minimum wage after the programme ended, the bottom part of the Portuguese wage distribution was
already quite flat. The programme partners and Portuguese authorities discussed the idea of a lower


(113) Acordo Tripartido para a Competitividade e Emprego, 22 March 2011. This Tripartite agreement was signed by the
      government, employer and business organisations, and most of the main trade unions. The General Confederation of Portuguese
      Workers (CGTP-IN) did not sign.
(114) Compromisso para o Crescimento, Competividade e Emprego, 18 January 2012.
(115) Of a sample group of 16 developed countries, Dickens, W.T. et al (2007) found that Portugal had the highest proportion of
      workers potentially affected by nominal wage rigidity. Messina, J. et al (2010) similarly found that, unlike other countries
      studies, Portugal had more nominal than real downward wage rigidity.
(116) Hallett, M, (2016)




                                                                                                                                             73
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            minimum wage for all young workers (117) but this was not pursued. Given very high youth
            unemployment, and the higher proportion of young workers earning at or near the minimum wage, there
            was an economic rationale for reducing the minimum wage for young workers, or even all workers.
            However there seems to be a consensus among Portuguese stakeholders that any attempt to reduce the
            minimum wage as part of the programme would have been misguided, as the negative impact on public
            opinion would have far outweighed any potential economic benefits. Given the importance of national
            ownership, restricting the MoU measure to a freeze was therefore understandable.

              550      Graph 5.1a: Monthly minimum wage and share of workers covered                                                  25   135         Graph 5.1b: Monthly minimum wage and other wage and cost indices

                      EUR                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                           130   index Apr 2006 = 100
              500                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                           125

                                                                                                                                           120
              450                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                           115

              400                                                                                                                     10   110

                                                                                                                                           105
              350                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                           100

                                                                                                                                            95
              300                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                       Oct


                                                                                                                                                                   Oct


                                                                                                                                                                               Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct
                                                                                                                                                 Apr


                                                                                                                                                             Apr


                                                                                                                                                                         Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Apr
                          Oct


                                      Oct


                                                  Oct


                                                              Oct


                                                                          Oct


                                                                                      Oct


                                                                                                  Oct


                                                                                                              Oct


                                                                                                                          Oct
                    Apr


                                Apr


                                            Apr


                                                        Apr


                                                                    Apr


                                                                                Apr


                                                                                            Apr


                                                                                                        Apr


                                                                                                                    Apr


                                                                                                                                Apr




                                                                                                                                                   06          07          08          09          10          11           12          13          14          15
                      06          07          08          09          10          11          12          13          14        15
                                                                                                                                                  Minimum wage, monthly                                                  Average wage, montly
                                Minimum wage, monthly
                                Share of workers covered by the minimum wage (rhs)                                                                Compensation per employee, hourly                                      Consumer price index
                    Source: European Commission
                                                                                                                                           Source: European Commission




            There has been a downward adjustment in average wage costs, but due in part to remaining
            rigidities this has not been distributed evenly. Wage growth slowed when the economic crisis initially
            hit (2008-11) and was on average negative during the programme period. As Graph 5.3b shows,
            Portugal's relative unit labour costs have fallen significantly. Due to nominal wage rigidity, linked both to
            collective bargaining agreements and to the restrictions that the Constitution and labour legislation place
            on the scope for permanent wage reductions (118), employers had little scope for reducing the wages of
            existing private sector workers (Section 4 discusses public sector pay). As an alternative means of
            reducing the nominal cost of labour the original programme MoU envisaged a fiscally neutral reduction in
            employer’s social security contributions, paid for by a commensurate rise in VAT. This proposed "fiscal
            devaluation" is discussed in more detail in Section 4. In the end it was not implemented. ULCs were also
            reduced by an increase in working time resulting from the removal of four national holidays in 2012. This
            was recently reversed, after the end of the programme.

            While there have been some reforms to widen the scope for firm level wage bargaining in the
            private sector, in practice the wage setting system is still quite rigid. As part of the programme,
            changes were made to reduce the extension of collective bargaining agreements to all remaining firms in
            a sector who were not original signatories. The new rules stated that a collective agreement would only be
            extended to cover all firms in a sector if the companies signing it represented at least 50% of the workers
            in the sector. As shown in Graph 5.2 the number of new collective wage agreements fell sharply from
            2011, with a particularly sharp decline in extensions. It appeared that the social partners sought to avoid
            negotiating under the new system. Sectoral collective agreements can also be temporarily suspended if
            there is agreement to do this at firm level. However in practice this provision is rarely used as it requires
            the firm-level intervention of the original signatories to a sectoral agreement, in a country with a tradition

            (117) The full minimum wage rate kicks in at 18 in Portugal for most workers, but a reduction of 20% is applied for apprentices,
                  trainees and interns.
            (118) Under Portuguese labour legislation firms cannot reduce contracted wages, even with the employee's consent. See Dias, D. et
                  al. (2013)




74
                                                                                                                                 5. Structural reforms




of centralised social dialogue. The idea of allowing direct employer-employee agreements at firm level
was discussed but not pursued. In June 2014, shortly after the end of the programme, the Portuguese
authorities further changed the rules on collective agreements so that they will now be extended to the
whole sector if at least 30% of the signatories on the employer side represent SMEs. The result is that the
large majority of sectoral agreements will again meet the conditions for extension. This measure is likely
to hinder efficient wage adjustment in lower-productivity firms and represents a major setback in the
reform of collective bargaining in Portugal. In aggregate the legislative changes enacted since the start of
the programme may therefore have a relatively modest impact on the responsiveness of wages to
economic conditions at firm level. (119)

      600                   Graph 5.2: Number of collective agreements signed and workers covered                        2,000
                                                                                                              th         1,800
      500
                                                                                                                         1,600
                                                                                                                         1,400
      400
                                                                                                                         1,200
      300                                                                                                                1,000
                                                                                                                         800
      200
                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                                         400
      100
                                                                                                                         200
         0                                                                                                               0
              01            03            05             07            09            11               13           15
               Sectoral          Group of firms          Firm-level          Extensions          Workers covered (rhs)


       Source: European Commission



The programme also included reforms to both reduce the cost of overtime and facilitate the flexible
adjustment of working time. The cost of overtime in Portugal was among the highest in Europe and
more generally working time arrangements were inflexible. Reforms undertaken during the programme
reduced the cost of overtime (120) and increased working time flexibility, as well as temporarily increasing
working hours in the public sector. This should help firms to accommodate economic shocks and shorter
term fluctuations in demand, manage employment fluctuations over the cycle, better accommodate
differences in work patterns across sectors, and become more internationally competitive.


Employment Protection Legislation (EPL)
Strict rules for individual dismissal of permanent workers were both a chronic and an acute
problem for the Portuguese economy. They hindered the creation of permanent jobs and had
helped to create a dual labour market. At the onset of the crisis Portugal had the strictest protection
against individual dismissals in the EU. In contrast, at least on paper, protections against collective
dismissals were much weaker. Two main elements made employers hire on temporary rather than
permanent contracts where possible. The first was the very high level of severance pay for workers on
open-ended contracts (30 days' pay per year worked). At the same time an earlier easing of the regulations
relating to fixed-term contracts had intensified the asymmetry between permanent and temporary
employees. The second was the narrow definition of fair dismissal for permanent employees, which
further raised the risks for employers in giving open-ended contracts. The proportion of employees on
temporary contracts increased from 10% in 1995 (below the EU average) to 23% in 2010 (the third
highest share in the EU).


(119) DG ECFIN (2014c).
(120) In most cases the supplement for overtime paid in addition to standard hourly pay was halved.




                                                                                                                                                    75
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Strict EPL also hindered job-to-job mobility, and was a barrier to economic restructuring in
            response to the crisis. If a worker moved to a different employer they lost the severance payment
            entitlements that they had acquired. This, combined with the difficulty in dismissing employees, hindered
            the reallocation of labour away from low-performing companies to sectors and firms with scope to
            expand. When the crisis hit this low level of labour market dynamism exacerbated an existing problem of
            long unemployment spells. It also made the restructuring of the economy more painful, and arguably
            more unfair. It was often not affordable or realistic for firms to respond to falling sales and profitability
            through dismissals or wage cuts. A high proportion of the reduction in labour income in the crisis came
            via struggling firms shutting down. (121)

            Comprehensive measures to relax strict EPL were therefore rightly a priority in the Portuguese
            programme. The measures in the MoU aimed to reduce labour market segmentation, foster job creation
            and facilitate investment and economic adjustment, in particular by moving towards a "single contract".
            As a first stage, building upon the March 2011 Tripartite Agreement, the severance payments due on
            open-ended contracts were to be fully aligned with those of fixed-term contracts. A second stage of
            reforms was then envisaged to: i) bring the level of severance payments closer to that of other EU
            countries; ii) make the definition of fair dismissal for open-ended contracts less restrictive; and iii) make
            part of workers' entitlement to severance payments portable to promote job-to-job mobility (by creating a
            fund financing notional individual accounts, similar to the Austrian system). The portable severance fund
            was not ultimately implemented, and some stakeholders consider that this is partly because the model
            proposed in the MoU was too complex. Given Portugal's starting position, and the importance of
            maintaining broad-based support for programme reforms, a "big bang" move to a flexible labour market
            during the programme was probably not feasible. It is therefore understandable that the MoU treated
            reforms to EPL as a staged process.

            Severance payments for fair dismissals from permanent contracts have progressively been reduced.
            Severance pay was initially reduced from 30 days per year of service to 20 days. Since October 2013 the
            compensation rights accrued are either 12 or 18 days of service depending on existing length of service.
            And from October 2016, 12 days of severance pay will be acquired for each year of service. These are
            significant changes, which bring the level of compensation for severance in Portugal much closer to
            international norms. The rules do though still incentivise employers to preferentially fire workers who
            were hired more recently. As people with employment contracts predating the reforms retain the more
            generous rights they had previously acquired, this gives them an added incentive not to move jobs.
            However most stakeholders consider that the grandfathering of existing rights was necessary for the
            reforms that were implemented to gain and maintain support. Severance payments are now higher for
            fixed term contracts, which should encourage employers to hire on open-ended contract for jobs of a
            permanent nature. It is encouraging that most of the net employment creation since the start of 2014 has
            been in permanent contracts (Graph 5.3a), and these reforms have aided improvements in the labour
            market.

            The definition of "fair" dismissal was expanded, but this reform was reversed after it was ruled
            unconstitutional. Before the programme, when employers attempted to carry out individual dismissals
            they were almost never classified as fair, even if the firm faced economic difficulties. As envisaged in the
            MoU, in 2012 the definition of "fair" dismissal based on redundancy or individual unsuitability for the
            role was expanded. The Constitutional Court reviewed this measure and ruled that it was unconstitutional
            and should be reversed. (122) The programme partners and Portuguese authorities did not anticipate this
            ruling. In response the Portuguese authorities introduced a different definition of fair dismissal. However
            some stakeholders consider that the current definition may not in practice make it much easier for firms to
            carry out "fair" dismissals without being subject to successful legal challenge as before the programme.


            (121) Carneiro A. et al (2013)
            (122) See Constitutional Court ruling no. 602/13 of 23 September 2013. Article 53 of the Portuguese Constitution states "Workers are
                  guaranteed job security, and dismissal without fair cause or for political or ideological reasons is prohibited."




76
                                                                                                      5. Structural reforms




Compensation for unfair dismissal remains high and in practice it remains difficult for firms to
carry out fair dismissals. The reduction in severance payments only applies to dismissals classified as
fair. During the programme the Portuguese authorities were asked to explore reductions in the high level
of compensation (and/or reinstatement) due for dismissals deemed to be unfair. The Portuguese
authorities did not pursue any changes before the end of the programme, citing the difficulty of reaching
agreement with the social partners. As was the case before the programme, workers who lodge a claim for
unfair dismissal are highly likely to be successful. It often takes a long time for unfair dismissal cases to
be decided and successful workers can be eligible for back pay and reinstatement. In practice, to avoid
lengthy and costly legal disputes employers and employees often reach voluntary severance agreements.
These involve severance payments higher than the legal minimum. The reforms to severance made during
the programme were valuable and significant. Nevertheless, the programme could have had a greater
focus on how to address the practical and incentive problems in the system. This issue was raised and
discussed during the programme, but not ultimately addressed. Some stakeholders suggest that the
operation of the judicial system is a bigger barrier to labour market flexibility than the labour code.


Unemployment Benefits
The programme included measures to bring the generosity of the Portuguese unemployment
benefits system in line with the European average, while at the same time expanding its coverage.
Before the programme Portugal had large disparities in entitlement to social benefits between different
groups of workers. Many, mainly older, workers were eligible for generous unemployment benefits. This
led to unemployment traps that could reduce work search effort and potentially entrench structural
unemployment. At the same time other (often younger) workers had little access to social protection (see
Section 7). This caused problems of unfairness, and also pockets of severe poverty in a crisis context. The
MoU included measures to reduce the maximum duration of unemployment benefits and to taper the level
down over time, but with existing rights protected. At the same time coverage of the unemployment
benefits system was to be expanded, particularly benefiting the young and those with a short tenure in
work. The MoU measures built on reforms that started before the programme, although benefits remain
somewhat more generous for older workers. Activation conditions for unemployment benefit recipients
have strengthened, but could still be applied more consistently.


Active Labour Market Policies
The quantity and quality of Portugal's pre-crisis Active Labour Market Policies (ALMPs) needed
upgrading to respond to the challenges posed by the crisis. In an economic crisis it is critical to ensure
the unemployed maintain their engagement with the labour market and do not slip into inactivity. The
programme measures focused on improving Portugal's activation policies to strengthen job search efforts
by the unemployed, enhance employability, and provide training to ease labour market mismatches. The
programme measures built on steps that the Portuguese authorities had already taken in response to the
crisis. As well as expanding employment services to respond to high and rising (long term)
unemployment, the Portuguese authorities were to assess the performance of existing employment
services and develop an action plan to make them more effective.

There is positive evidence on Portugal's expanded and refocused activation services, but there is
still scope for further improvement. In March 2012, the Portuguese government launched an action
plan aimed at the modernisation of its Public Employment Service (PES). One aspect was increasing the
engagement of jobseekers with the PES. Another element was putting in place a number of fiscal
incentives and short training courses to support the hiring and reskilling of job seekers. As the Portuguese
labour market was depressed through the programme period it will tend to delay any clear positive
impacts of reforms to ALMPs on hiring. There is though some encouraging evidence of a positive impact
on reemployment rates from the activation programmes introduced in Portugal in 2012. (123) Total

(123) Martins, P. et al (2014)




                                                                                                                         77
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            participation in ALMPs as a proportion of the registered unemployed rose from 5% in October 2011 to
            25% in September 2015. Fighting long term unemployment remains a significant challenge for the PES,
            particularly given the low skill levels of Portuguese job seekers. As well as adapting policies in response
            to evaluation evidence when it becomes available, there remains scope to improve the effectiveness of
            career counsellors in job centres and to more consistently implement the activation and sanctions regimes.

            In 2014 a Youth Guarantee was implemented to help fight the upsurge in youth unemployment.
            Portugal made substantial efforts to put the Youth Guarantee into practice, to help young people not in
            employment, education or training, and set up a monitoring system. Some challenges remain, including
            reaching all young people who would be eligible and ensuring that future skills needs are identified
            before youth guarantee offers are designed.

            5.2.2. Education and skills

            Measures related to the education system were included in the programme because Portugal has
            very low educational attainment compared to other EU Member States. Portugal has the second-
            highest proportion of working age adults with low skills in the EU. The programme focused on reforms
            that could raise the quality of human capital and facilitate better labour market matching in three areas:
            improving Portugal's approach to education policy evaluation; an action plan to improve the quality of
            secondary education; and reforms aiming to improve the focus and quality of vocational training.


            Evaluation of education policy
            The programme provided an impetus to a necessary overhaul of Portugal's approach to education
            policy evaluation. An apparently low cost-effectiveness of education and training systems was coupled
            with the government having a limited idea of what worked, and lacking the capacity to address
            underperformance. It was therefore appropriate to try to use the programme to help improve the future
            effectiveness and responsiveness of Portuguese public policy. The programme measures focused on
            setting up an analysis, monitoring, assessment and reporting system in order to accurately evaluate the
            results and impacts of education and training policies, including of policies already in place. The specific
            fields covered included cost saving measures, vocational education and training and policies to improve
            school results and contain early school leaving.

            A new evaluation and monitoring system has been put in place but the move to more evidence-
            based policy making remains a work in progress. A new information system has been put in place to
            monitor and evaluate the performance of pupils in the educational system. Several stakeholders
            highlighted this as an innovative and valuable tool. The authorities have stated their commitment to
            continuing to improve the evaluation and monitoring of education and training policies, and in many
            cases the data is adequate to allow this. However limited pre-existing evaluation capacity also made it
            harder to assess the impact (realised or potential) of the reforms made under the programme as a whole.
            Arguably the MoU condition on improving evaluation and monitoring could have been generalised to
            cover all public policy, not just education and training.


            Secondary Education
            There was scope for improving the effectiveness of Portugal's education system. School results have
            improved over time in Portugal. However there was still significant scope for improving the effectiveness
            of schools without imposing additional budgetary costs. Levels of early school leaving have traditionally
            been high, although they fell substantially in the crisis due both to policy efforts and to the reduction in
            job opportunities for young people.. Education levels are clearly a major long term problem, but whether
            it is something to be addressed through an economic adjustment programme is more open to question.




78
                                                                                                     5. Structural reforms




Substantial progress has been made in modernising the educational system, though only time will
tell how successful it proves to be. The programme built on substantive reforms that the government had
already started. A comprehensive reform of the pre-university education system aimed to increase school
accountability and tackle low achievement. Measures were introduced to improve incentives for teachers
and the quality of teaching, give schools more autonomy while subjecting them to external evaluation,
and strengthen the link between curricula and skill needs in the labour market. Tertiary education has also
been rationalised, including by establishing stronger links to business. Despite recent progress, tertiary
attainment could rise further. But the concrete impact of measures taken in the programme will only feed
through in the longer term and one of the goals of the pupil monitoring system discussed above is to help
curb early school leaving. Effective education reform and monitoring need to remain policy priorities in
the coming years if Portugal is to deliver sustained economic growth and converge with high income
Member States.


Vocational Training
The existing vocational training system was not adequate to address Portugal's chronic skills
problems, or the growth in skills mismatch produced by the crisis. As in many other Member States,
vocational training had a generally poor reputation for both quality and targeting. Programme
conditionality focused on requiring the Portuguese authorities to present an action plan. The aim was
firstly to ensure the quality, attractiveness and labour market relevance of vocational education and
training through partnerships with companies or other stakeholders. The second main element was
enhancing career guidance mechanisms for prospective students in vocational educational training.

Vocational training reforms have been undertaken that are supposed to enhance labour market
matching. An action plan produced by the Portuguese authorities early in the programme indicated that
some courses were not effective. As a result provision has been reorganised to link curricula to the
concrete needs of the labour market, thus increasing quality and employability. Significant progress has
been made in setting up the new vocational training schools of reference to improve the quality and
attractiveness of educational and vocational training. The Portuguese are also moving towards "dual
certification", and seeking to have academic and work-based training better complement each other. The
total number of participants in the system doubled from 2011-14.

The reforms are positive, though it is not yet clear how effective they will be. In principle the
programme reforms should improve Portuguese vocational education significantly. But within a
programme period it is more realistic to develop a reformed skills system and put it in place than it is to
expect to see concrete impacts on the labour market at a whole economy level. A lot of what was done
specifically in the context of the programme was in line with the evolution of European Social Fund
(ESF) programmes across the EU,

5.2.3. Overall assessment of labour market measures in the programme

The scope of the programme was broadly correct in the sense that the labour market reforms
match the main challenges identified in other analysis. Where programme performance was mixed, it
seems to have been linked more to shortcomings in the detailed specification and implementation of
measures – and long time lags - rather than major omissions in the programme design. The Tripartite
agreements were important in gaining support for delivering labour market reforms early in the
programme, though they also set limits on how far the MoU conditions on labour market regulation could
go. In some cases the compromise reforms implemented were somewhat weaker than the initial intentions
of the MoU, but this can be justified by the importance of retaining the consent of social partners to the
reform process.

Important labour market reforms were adopted during the programme, and firms consider them
to have had a significant impact, but the momentum of reform dropped over time. Administrative



                                                                                                                        79
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            capacity was only rarely the primary reason if reforms were not implemented in full or on time.
            Severance payments have been reduced and individual dismissals eased; the duration and net replacement
            rates of unemployment benefits have been reduced while coverage has been enlarged; working time
            flexibility has been increased; and steps were taken to reform the wage-setting mechanism. This has
            helped to make the labour market more flexible, and to an extent to reduce undue protection of insiders at
            the cost of outsiders. Progress has also been made in improving the functioning of Public Employment
            Services and activation policies. This, and education reform, are ongoing processes. A survey of
            Portuguese firms undertaken by the IMF in March 2015 found that most thought there had been at least
            "some impact" from each of the main areas of labour market reform. (124) Labour market reforms were
            relatively front-loaded compared to other structural reforms. In part this was due to good progress at the
            start of the programme. However both legal rulings and government policy decisions set back the process
            of labour market reform towards the end of the programme and in its aftermath.

              250       Graph 5.3a: Employment by type (permanent,
                                                                                    Graph 5.3b: Nominal unit labour costs (2000=100),
                      temporary, self-employed), year-on-year changes
                     th                                                      130
              200                                                                                   whole economy

              150                                                            125
              100
                                                                             120
               50
                                                                             115
                0
               -50                                                           110
              -100
                                                                             105
              -150
                                                                             100
              -200
                                                                                   2000
                                                                                   2001
                                                                                   2002
                                                                                   2003
                                                                                   2004
                                                                                   2005
                                                                                   2006
                                                                                   2007
                                                                                   2008
                                                                                   2009
                                                                                   2010
                                                                                   2011
                                                                                   2012
                                                                                   2013
                                                                                   2014
                                                                                   2015
              -250
                  00Q1    02Q1   04Q1   06Q1   08Q1     10Q1   12Q1   14Q1                        PT                EA19
                         Permanent employees          Temporary employees
               Source: European Commission                                     Source: Eurostat


            The labour market has started to strengthen but labour market reform is unfinished business. It
            takes time to see the positive effects of labour market reforms, particularly in depressed economies. It is
            unlikely that structural reforms could have prevented the continued rise in unemployment in the first part
            of the programme. In aggregate developments in the Portuguese labour market since the onset of the crisis
            have been driven more by changes to job separation rates than to job finding rates. Unemployment is now
            falling. As Graph 5.3a shows there has been an encouraging pick-up in permanent contracts since early
            2014. Nevertheless, unemployment remains unacceptably high, especially when discouraged and under-
            employed workers are included. Significant net emigration since 2011 (see Section 7) may have helped
            mitigate cyclical unemployment, but it exacerbates existing long term demographic and skills problems.
            While Portugal's EPL has loosened more than other countries, it is still among the highest in the EU. In
            practice the capacity of companies to vary wages in response to firm-level conditions remains limited.
            Portugal's relative labour costs have fallen significantly since the onset of the crisis (Graph 5.3b), though
            nominal wage rigidity (confirmed by the Constitutional Court, which ruled some targeted and permanent
            wage reductions to be unconstitutional (125)) continues to complicate the process of economic adjustment
            in a low growth, low inflation environment. Further reforms are therefore needed for Portugal to be able
            to absorb economic shocks within a monetary union more smoothly in future.




            (124) IMF (2015c)
            (125) See for example Constitutional Court Decision 353/2012, 5 July 2012, and Constitutional Court Decision 413/2014, 30 May
                  2014,




80
                                                                                                                                                                           5. Structural reforms




5.3.      REMOVING DISTORTIONS TO INVESTMENT ALLOCATION: GOODS AND SERVICES MARKETS
          AND FRAMEWORK CONDITIONS.

The starting point was one with high level of rigidities in the goods and services markets and the
business environment. According to the OECD indicators of Product Market Regulation, Portugal
ranked as a highly-regulated country in the market environment in 2008 compared to peers (Graph 5.4).


                                                              Graph 5.4: Product Market Regulation
       2.25
       2.00
                                                                                                                     1.69
       1.75
                                                                                                                         1.29
       1.50
       1.25
       1.00
       0.75
       0.50
       0.25
       0.00
                 RO
                 CY



                 BG




                 CZ
                 BE
                 HR
                 EL
                  SI




                 LV

                 MT

                 LT

                 LU
                  IE
                 ES
                 EA



                 HU

                 DE
                  FI
                 EE

                  IT
                 DK
                 AT
                 UK
                 NL
                 PL




                 SE

                 FR




                 PT




                 SK
                                                                                2008          2013
  Source: OECD. Notes: Countries ordered by rank in 2013. Product Market Regulation indicator is a synthetic indicator summarising a wide array of different
  regulatory provisions of product markets (e.g. state control, barriers to entrepreneurship, barriers to trade and investment, etc.). A higher value means stricter regulation.




Product market reforms were considered key to support the adjustment process, lift productivity
and foster sustainable growth and to share the burden of the adjustment across society. By
facilitating the entry of firms and increasing competition, the transmission channels of product market
reforms could kick in: reductions in mark-ups and input prices could expand tradable sectors, improve the
demand for labour in tradable industries and increase real wages, stimulating higher aggregate demand
and investment, and leading to higher output and employment. Product market reforms could also lift
productivity as they can raise the quality and availability of intermediate inputs, particularly from services
and network industries inputs. The indirect impact of liberalizing services and network industries on total
factor productivity of downstream tradable industries could be large. (126) Furthermore, product market
reforms could contribute to the social balance of the programme by reducing unwarranted sector
protection and rents, so that all segments of the society shared the burden of the needed adjustment.

The overall objective of the programme in these areas was reducing barriers in sheltered sectors of
the economy to improve competition and reduce excessive rents, to improve the business
environment and to reallocate resources to the tradable sector. The main areas concerned included
network industries such as energy markets, transport, telecommunications and postal services and other
services sectors (including regulated professions). Other measures supporting the same objectives related
to improving the framework conditions, which included reforms of the judicial system, the business
environment and public procurement rules, as well as of the housing market. In many cases, the reforms
mainly implied ensuring proper transposition and implementation of EU law (e.g. 3rd Postal Directive,
Services Directive, Late Payments Directive, Energy Directive, etc.). The following reviews the
challenges at the start of the programme in each of these areas, the programme approach to address them,
implementation issues and outcomes in the various sectors.(127)




(126) Arnold, J. et al, 2011.
(127) Agricultural policies were excluded from the programme.




                                                                                                                                                                                              81
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            5.3.1. Goods and services markets

            Energy markets
            At the start of the programme, the main issue for both electricity and gas markets was weak
            competition, related to slow progress in liberalising markets. The historic electricity incumbent (EDP)
            remained dominant upstream and downstream. Although retail markets were open to competition,
            households and small enterprises could opt for the regulated tariff that EDP was obliged to offer. As this
            had historically been set at a low level, it acted as an effective entry barrier and contributed to an
            accumulated tariff debt (see below). In the gas market, the historic incumbent (GALP), was the sole
            importer of gas and the main player in the retail market. Portugal held a large energy balance deficit, due
            inter alia to structural features such as above-average energy dependence and energy intensity. Other
            issues related to the efficiency of support schemes for renewables and the inconsistency of energy policy
            instruments. An all-Iberia electricity market (MIBEL) had been established which had decreased prices
            between Portugal and Spain and there were plans for a similar market for gas (MIBGAS).

            The electricity tariff debt was substantial and expected to rise steadily, posing risks to the
            sustainability of the national electricity system. Since 2006 the Portuguese electricity system had
            accumulated a tariff debt amounting to €1.8bn in 2011 and set to increase substantially over the coming
            years. This had resulted partly from misalignments between regulated tariffs (based on 1 year-ahead
            estimates of fuel costs) and actual market prices and from high so-called policy costs (production costs
            originated by government decisions). In particular, in the years prior to the programme, rising subsidies to
            renewable and conventional electricity had led to increasing electricity costs and enabled high rates of
            return for energy utilities. These subsidies included both support under the special regime (renewables
            and co-generation) and under the ordinary regime (such as power guarantee incentives and compensation
            for the early termination of former long term power purchase agreements – known as CMEC). In
            addition, implicit incumbents' market behaviours were also detrimental to a sound competitive
            environment and thus further enabled the persistence of excessive rents in the sector. The increasing costs
            of electricity production were not fully compensated by increased tariffs, resulting in the tariff
            deficits/cumulated debt (128).

            Against this background, the programme integrated deep reforms to improve the functioning of the
            energy sector. The importance of reforming the energy sector to reduce the tariff debt, lower production
            costs and increase efficiency was clear early in the programme, which was designed so as to: ensure
            sustainability of the national electricity system by measures aimed at reducing excessive rents and
            eliminating the tariff debt by 2020; complete the liberalisation of the electricity and gas markets and the
            transposition of the 3rd EU energy package; ensure consistency of the overall energy policy, reviewing
            existing instruments (e.g. tax policy on energy) and further integrate the Iberian market for electricity and
            gas. Overall, the programme measures rightly reflected the main concerns regarding the energy sector. As
            the programme advanced, measures in this area became increasingly detailed, giving clear saving targets
            and guidance on how to achieve them. This may have been a way to increase pressure on the government
            commitment to take reforms forward as it soon became evident that there were important hurdles to
            achieve meaningful results and strong vested interests could be hampering progress.

            A wide range of measures were adopted to eliminate the tariff debt by 2020 and remove restrictions
            to competition. The government approved three packages of measures, negotiated with producers, which
            aimed at tackling economic rents and eliminating the tariff debt by 2020, while limiting real price
            increases for electricity consumers at around 1.5 to 2% per year. The main measures included:
            moratorium on support to new renewable energy installations and elimination of power guarantee
            incentives; revised remuneration scheme for co-generation; agreement with EDP on reduced
            compensation for the early termination of former long-term power purchase agreements; levies paid by

            (128) Johannesson Linden, A. et al (2014)




82
                                                                                                                           5. Structural reforms




wind and small hydro producers until 2020; a special levy applied on the energy sector in 2014-2015 (set
to continue in 2016). Other relevant measures affecting the energy markets included the phasing out of
electricity and gas regulated tariffs, which should help to liberalise markets further; the streamlining of
some energy policy instruments; the strengthening of the regulator to ensure independence and all powers
foreseen in the EU law (3rd Energy package) and further integration of Portuguese and Spanish markets.

The costs of energy for end users remain very high and the tariff debt went up substantially during
the programme. The number of consumers under liberalised markets represent now 71% of the total in
Portugal (129). However, electricity prices have continued to increase significantly for households and for
the industrial sector, also due to the tax increases (130). In order to limit price increases, part of the costs,
namely those related with renewables and co-generation subsidisation, were converted into debt. Between
2011 and 2015, the overall tariff debt increased by €3.3bn, topping at about €5bn at the end of 2015 and is
expected to start declining in 2016 and achieve clearance by end-2020. There have also been some cost
reductions, mainly from reduced co-generation tariffs. Overall, price developments follow from the fact
that 80% of the wholesale electricity is traded under pre-liberalization contracts or subsidized regimes,
networks are regulated and liberalized activities represent no more than 10% of overall costs (131). Despite
the three packages of measures, more control of state aid and stranded costs is required. Regarding the gas
sector, the liberalised supply of natural gas increased considerably during the programme, fostered by
high penalty factors in regulated transitory tariffs, to induce switching from regulated suppliers. However,
prices have not become more competitive, in particular when compared to EU prices. Cross-border
competition is still limited given insufficient integration with the Spanish market.

Overall, the implementation of the energy market reforms was insufficient and did not manage to
skim off unjustified rents in a sector characterised by strong vested interests, impeding a more
balanced sharing of the burden of the adjustment. The simultaneous privatisation process may
have conflicted with stronger efforts to reform this sector. Despite efforts in the energy sector being
shielded by a unique international legal framework, the government did not take sufficient ownership and
missed the opportunity to reform more decisively this key sector. The government was resisting on
decisive reforms of the sector on the basis of the ongoing privatization process and the fact that the
existing tariff structure was the result of previous policies that aimed at developing green energy. Indeed,
there was an underlying difficult conflict between the privatisations of electricity companies favoured by
the programme and beneficial from the fiscal side and the structural reforms of the sector guided towards
eliminating rents, which would make the sale of the companies less attractive. Overall, it is an open
question if the sequencing between the privatisation process and the reforms of the sector was optimal.
However, privatization conditions should not have been such that the government would have its hands
tied up in the future if it was to try later to control policy costs. Moreover, there were frequent delays and
insufficient achievements in delivering the targets. Eliminating the tariff debt, which is heavily weighing
on the high costs of electricity for end users, remains a significant challenge if price increases are to be
kept limited as desirable for firms' competitiveness and households' budgets. Consulted stakeholders also
consider unsatisfactory the extent and pace of implementation of reforms in the energy sector, in
particular to tackle the tariff debt and reduce excessive rents, mentioning that the government did not
manage to overcome strong vested interests as a key reason for insufficient progress. While the
government was quite efficient in cutting subsidies to small producers of renewable energies, it was much
less so in tackling the grandfathered contracts for the big companies. The limited outcomes also weigh on
the perception of an unfair sharing of the burden of the adjustment (132).




(129) ERSE.
(130) Between the second halves of 2011 and 2015, electricity prices in Portugal, including all taxes and levies, grew by 21.4% for
      domestic consumers (14% in the EU-28) and by 23.9% for the industrial sector (7.1% in the EU-28). Excluding VAT, prices
      grew by 13.6% for consumers (14.1% in EU-28) and by 14.1% for the industrial sector (6.4% in the EU-28).
(131) Stakeholder consultation.
(132) Stakeholder consultation.




                                                                                                                                              83
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Transport
            The performance of certain modes of transport was not supportive of competitiveness and
            economic attractiveness. The degree of competition in transport services was quite low, partly due to
            anti-competitive regulations. In railways, the incumbent undertaking CP was not sufficiently independent
            from the State and the balance of the infrastructure manager (REFER) was not ensured (both CP and
            REFER were loss making and had high levels of debt). The performance of urban public transport could
            also be improved. In the maritime sector, the geographical advantage of Portuguese ports remained
            largely unexploited, with performance below potential, not necessarily linked to lack of infrastructure.
            Low competition and inefficiencies in port services due to strong interest groups contributed to
            underutilization of sea ports, as well as bottlenecks in hinterland connections to and from the main ports.
            Concerning aviation, at the onset of the programme the state still owned Aeroportos de Portugal (ANA)
            and the national airline TAP. Regarding roads, investment was significant in the pre-crisis period (1.1%
            of GDP on average between 2000 -2008). Within land, road dominance was above the EU average, in
            particular in freight, contributing to a poor performance of the Portuguese transport sector in terms of
            energy efficiency and transport externalities, notably congestion. Portugal had to correctly transpose EU
            law (Eurovignette Directive), deemed to improve competitiveness of the road haulage sector.

            The programme objectives aimed at improving the efficiency of the overall transport system,
            improve the financial sustainability of transport SOEs and strengthen competition in key sectors.
            The MoU contained provisions to promote a better balance between modes of transport, including further
            use of railway and maritime transport and improved interconnections. In railways, the overall goal was to
            strengthen competition and attract more traffic by measures like rationalization of the network, revision of
            the infrastructure charging scheme and some privatizations. An issue of particular concern was the
            operational losses and mounting debt of transport SOEs, which were among the most-indebted state-
            owned companies and which could have potentially important fiscal implications, as it actually occurred
            towards the end of the programme.

            The port reform became a top priority of the structural reform agenda for programme partners.
            This was rightly so, as this is a sector of particular importance for Portugal's competitiveness (133) and
            addressing its long-standing inefficiencies could play a key role in the strategy to promote exports.
            Implementation of the measures should result in an increased performance of port services, more jobs in
            port-related industries and enhancing competitiveness of Portuguese products.

            Some progress was made in necessary reforms to the transport sector, but the pace of reforms was
            in general slow, with many delays and many key reforms pending at the end of the programme.
            Steps were taken towards more competition in the sector, including by establishing a new independent
            regulatory authority for transport. In the railway sector, some measures were implemented to achieve
            operational balance of the rail infrastructure manager, such as rationalisation of costs and closure of loss-
            making lines. However, many key reforms were repeatedly delayed or not fully implemented within the
            foreseen timeline, such as the handing over of CP Carga freight terminals to the network operating
            company (the unbundling was a precondition for competition in cargo rail services), followed by its
            privatisation, or the launch of new concessions for the provision of urban public transport services in the
            metropolitan areas of Lisbon and Porto. By the end of the programme, key milestones of the integrated
            long-term plan for Portugal's transport system had not been effectively implemented as initially foreseen.

            In the port sector, key measures were implemented, though they have had limited impact so far.
            The adoption of a port labour law and the gradual elimination of the port user fees (TUP-Carga) were
            positive developments, allowing a downward adjustment of port operating costs, though actual
            achievements are far from the objective of reducing user costs by 25-30%. The pass-through of these

            (133) In terms of value, around 1/3 of incoming and outgoing goods are transported by sea, port-related costs often exceed 30% of
                  total good transport costs and for some exporters, port user cost can reach 10% of production costs. Sources: European
                  Commission (2013) and DG ECFIN (2014b).




84
                                                                                                      5. Structural reforms




cost-savings from port concessionaires to port users (especially exporting firms) was hampered by the
delays in renegotiation of most of the existing port concessions, which is essential to bring about more
competition and efficiency. The slow progress in implementing these reforms during the programme
reflected among others the strong interest groups of the sector (namely, port concessionaires, holding to
the status quo of their long-term concession contracts and port workers, strongly unionized and presenting
strong resistance to reforms).

The transport sector reforms have not reached full potential so far, due to slow implementation
pace, lack on incentives and narrow enforcement. The limited reach of these reforms reflects a mix of
technical, legislative and political challenges. But also, the three institutions could have strengthened
pressure for the enforcement of structural reforms in this area when confronted with mixed progress in
implementation. More determined progress in these reforms was often given in during programme
negotiations in exchange for further efforts from the authorities in other areas, in particular in the fiscal
area (134).


Telecommunications and postal sector
The programme design took into account that the telecom and postal sectors should benefit from
higher competition. Concentration was high in the telecom market as well as profitability rates.
Competition was rather good in broadband internet, but the segment needed to be carefully regulated as
most operators depended on the copper cable network of the incumbent. There was low consumer
mobility between operators/service providers. Regarding the postal sector, Portugal had not yet
transposed the 3rd Postal Directive, under which full market opening/liberalisation should have been
reached by 2010. Against this background, the appropriate MoU objectives were to increase competition
in the markets by lowering entry barriers, guarantee access to network/infrastructure and strengthen
power of the National Regulator Authority to supervise the functioning of the markets and guarantee a
level playing field.

The main measures targeted under the programme for these sectors were adopted. A new telecoms
regulatory framework entered into force, termination rates were lowered, a mobile spectrum auction
promoting market entry was launched – although it yielded no new entries in the market-, universal
service contracts were assigned through a non-discriminatory tendering procedure and measures to
alleviate the restrictions on mobility of consumers implemented. In the postal sector, the transposition of
the 3rd Postal Directive was concluded and a new framework for the provision of the postal universal
service was adopted, introducing competitive pressure in the provision of this service. Conditionality was
in general complied with, although deadlines had to be often revised, e.g. for the renegotiation of
contracts and launching of tender for the designation of universal services providers.

The impact of these measures on competition and prices has been mixed. There seem to be links
between some measures and market developments: eg. the decrease of mobile termination rates
contributed to reduce the difference between on-net and off-net mobile calls prices and to the increase of
bundled offers, including mobile calls to all networks. Although the MoU envisaged measures to reduce
barriers to consumers' mobility, the market developments and the amount of consumers' complaints show
that consumers have not fully grasped the potential benefits of competition. Some years after the
liberalization of the postal markets and in spite of the existence of nine formally authorized operators,
there is still insufficient competition for standard post delivery services (135). A key reason for these
limited achievements seems to be that market developments and the introduction of innovation in the
telecommunications sector take place at a very fast pace and new competition challenges arise that will
need to be evaluated in the coming years.


(134) Stakeholder consultation.
(135) Feedback on outcomes from stakeholder consultation.




                                                                                                                         85
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Other services sector and regulated professions
            At the onset of the programme, important barriers to entry remained in some sectors to the benefit
            of insiders in the market, which could be penalising the entire economy. Sectoral profitability showed
            that Portuguese firms in the construction, wholesale trade and hotels and restaurants sectors had been
            increasing in pre-programme years, indicating room for more competition and rents compression. The
            Services Directive provided an appropriate framework for liberalization and needed to be fully
            implemented. The estimated gains from its full implementation were large for Portugal (136). In particular,
            several sectors were still subject to sector-specific legislation which needed amendments to lift
            restrictions on cross-border providers and remove limits to competition (i.e. real estate and construction
            services). Limitations to exercising regulated professional services such as accountants, lawyers,
            pharmacists and architects also existed, which also had a negative effect on competition. In view of these
            challenges, the overall programme objectives were to eliminate entry barriers in order to increase
            competition in the services and regulated professions sectors through conditionality that was rather
            extensive and detailed.

            Portugal adopted significant legislation aimed at liberalising services and regulated professions.
            The planned timeframe for implementing these reforms turned out to be too optimistic and did not
            take consideration of lengthy procedures and capacity constraints. The transposition of the Services
            Directive was relatively successful and relevant reforms to most sectors were implemented at the end of
            the programme. A new horizontal law on regulated professions was adopted in 2013, laying down the
            principles for reforming 18 statutes for 19 regulated professions. However, by the end of the programme,
            practical implementation lagged behind. The bylaws of some professional associations are not yet fully in
            line with the Service Directive. The programme was rather detailed and extensive on regulated
            professions, but the pace of reform was slower than expected. This indicates to a large extent an
            underestimation of the time needed once the real hands-on process of reform goes deeper, including
            lengthy negotiations with some professional bodies due to their strong bargaining power. The timeframe
            set for these reforms probably did not take full consideration of all these necessary steps and also capacity
            constraints in the Portuguese administration.

            The recent reforms have had a positive impact on productivity. EC estimated that the EU Services
            Directive and the business environment reforms implemented up until mid-2013 have boosted labour
            productivity in the sectors affected by the Directive by around 9% in Portugal (137).

            This area of structural reform exemplifies how the programme was an umbrella to push for certain
            pieces of EU legislation. Stakeholders considered that in areas like the Services Directive, among others,
            the EC was trying to accelerate its agenda for reforms. But the changes for a full transposition of the
            relevant EU Directives would have happened anyway in the absence of a programme, though probably at
            a slower pace. To certain extent this strategy filled up the programme reform agenda and implied losing
            target of the most urgently needed reforms.

            5.3.2. Framework conditions

            Judicial system
            The extreme inefficiency and slowness of the judicial system was impeding the well functioning of
            the economy. At the start of the programme, the judicial system was exceptionally ill-functioning in
            comparison to peers (see Graphs 5.5a and 5.5b), with performance indicators among the worst in the EU.
            The system was extremely protracted (dispute settlement usually taking many years), costly in the legal
            enforcement of laws and contracts, archaic in its management and working methods, cumbersome and


            (136) Monteagudo, J. et al (2012).
            (137) DG ECFIN (2014e) and Varga, J. et al (2013)




86
                                                                                                                                                                    5. Structural reforms




surrounded by enormous uncertainty. Certain regimes/codes dated back to the last century, making the
system very rigid, and court backlogs were significant, with 1 ½ million debt claims pending cases as the
bulk of it. Given that the functioning of court procedures plays an important role in investors' decisions,
the dysfunctions of the judicial system negatively impacted on the business environment and clearly acted
as a major deterrent for investment, particularly for foreign direct investment.

Improving the functioning of the judicial system became an immediate priority of the programme.
An agenda for the judiciary reform was quickly set up, benefitting from the experience of programme
partners with such kind of reforms. It also drew on the Judicial Reform Map that had been announced
shortly before, adding additional steps to make the judicial system more efficient. The main areas of
reform focused on: reducing slowness of the system by eliminating the backlog of courts' cases;
improving the efficiency of civil case processing and ensuring effective enforcement of contracts;
restructuring the court system and adopting new court management models; and making more transparent
and sustainable the budget for the judiciary. The conditionality was framed as general objectives so that it
would give the Portuguese authorities leeway on the best means for attaining the targets, which proved
positive to increase ownership. However, no quantitative indicators suitable for reform monitoring were
proposed. The conditionality was sometimes adjusted over time, which seemed warranted as it reflected,
for example, the follow-up to the elaboration of reform plans after a first phase or reinforced efforts to
meet targets (e.g. urgent measures to combat the remaining backlog of cases at 8th/9th review).

                          Graph 5.5a: Clearance Rate, 2010                                          Graph 5.5b: Disposition Time, 2010
  EL
  CY                                                                           PT                                                                        1096
  ES                                                                           MT
  PT                      88%                                                  CY
  MT                                                                           EL
  RO                                                                           ES
  SE                                                                            IT
  CZ                                                                           FR
  LV                                                                           SE
  FR                                                                            SI
  BG                                                                           SK
   SI                                                                          LU
  PL                                                                           RO
                                                                               LV
  AT
                                                                               HR
  NL
                                                                               EE
   FI
                                                                               CZ
  SK
                                                                                FI
  LT                                                                           HU
  HU                                                                           NL
  DK                                                                           BG
   IT                                                                          AT
  EE                                                                           PL
  HR                                                                           LT
  LU                                                                           DK

    60%          80%         100%          120%         140%            160%         0        200         400         600          800         1000        1200
                                                                               Source: CEPEJ. Disposition Time (number of days): Pending cases / Resolved cases x
   Source: CEPEJ. Clearance Rate (%): Resolved Cases / Incoming Cases
                                                                               365. Non-criminal cases in first-instance.




The key measures for judicial reform stipulated in the programme were adopted. Cornerstone
reforms were the new regulatory framework for the enforcement agents, strengthening the authority and
financing structure of the oversight body; the new Code of Civil Procedure to speed up civil and
commercial litigation; and the Judicial Organisation Act to streamline the judiciary. Other key reforms
included strengthening alternative dispute resolution to facilitate out-of-court settlement and the
establishment of specialised courts on competition matters and on intellectual property rights. Reforms
often triggered changes in by-laws, new IT systems and applications and necessitated various temporary
task forces. The implementation plan progressed largely as scheduled in the successive MoUs, even often
ahead of schedule. However, the provision of statistical data (especially on tax cases) suffered important
delays or insufficient implementation. Reforms often followed extensive consultation with stakeholders
and experts (including Technical Assistance from the IMF/EC). The advances in the reform agenda were
possible thanks to the good cooperation between the Portuguese authorities, the legal system's players and
the programme partners. Stakeholders thought that there was a rather strong political will from the
Portuguese authorities to conduct the reforms and, being aware of capacity constraints, they only
committed to realistic targets which they delivered.




                                                                                                                                                                                       87
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Judiciary reforms take some time to show in performance indicators, but the available data already
            show a positive trend. Judiciary reforms do not deliver visible results immediately, as first old legislation
            needs to phase out and statistical data is often lagged. However, performance indicators such as clearance
            rate/disposition, time/average resolution speed and number of outstanding cases are showing some
            improvements (138). Portugal’s ranking in indicators such as ‘enforcing contracts’ and ‘resolving
            insolvency’ has improved in recent years. (139)

            However, quality indicators of the judicial processes are still weak in international comparisons
            and some inefficiencies of the judicial system are still among the main constraints to business
            activity in Portugal. Efficiency indicators for civil and commercial cases, which are relevant for
            resolving commercial disputes, are still weak. Furthermore, in practice, companies still consider that the
            judicial length is among the most important costs of contexts (140) and a key factor hampering
            competitiveness.

            The programme was an important thrust for reforms of the judiciary but longer time is needed to
            solve long-standing inefficiencies. Overall, programme measures seem to have been broad and deep in
            scope and effective in improving the situation. The programme was an instrument to push reforms that
            would otherwise have taken longer or face more opposition, in particular when there were political
            interests at stake (e.g. reorganisation of judicial districts). Many of the positive impacts of these reforms
            are expected to come in the near future. At any rate, the deeply-rooted inefficiencies of the judicial system
            need to be effectively solved in a longer timespan than the three years programme. Effective
            implementation together with proper monitoring of developments is now the real challenge. The
            monitoring and evaluation of court procedures will be essential to help improving the functioning of the
            justice systems, which is an important structural condition on which to base Portugal's sustainable growth.


            Competition policy
            The speed and effectiveness of the enforcement of national and EU competition rules needed to be
            improved. Key challenges included the Portuguese Competition Authority (PCA)'s limited capacity to
            conduct inspections and the need to ensure its financial independence and appropriate financial means to
            attract and retain an adequate level of qualified staff. Competition rules' enforcement needed to be made
            more autonomous from other legislation and the competition law should be updated to reflect
            developments in national and EU law. Stronger and independent sectoral regulators were also considered
            essential to ensure a level playing field, in particular in network industries.

            The overarching aim of the programme measures was to reinforce competition enforcement
            through legislative and institutional changes. The PCA's effectiveness would be raised by revisions of
            the competition law. Enforcement of competition rules would also be strengthened with the creation of a
            specialised court for competition issues. To accompany the liberalization and market-opening reforms,
            the role of sectorial regulators would be strengthened. The programme also contained measures to abolish
            "golden shares" and special rights by the State in private companies, in particular in the energy and
            communication sectors (EDP, PT Telecom and GALP) to foster a market-led functioning of these
            companies and eliminate obstacles to the free movement of capital.

            Conditionality was overall fulfilled, with some delays in some measures. As part of the measures
            foreseen under the programme, a new Competition Act-Law entered into force in 2012, harmonising the
            Portuguese competition law with EU rules and international best practices and fostering the PCA's
            enforcement and advocacy powers. The new legal framework also led to the creation of a new specialised

            (138) See for example "Destaque Estatístico Trimestral", Bulletin nº 23, January 2016, Direção-Geral da Política de Justiça. Portugal.
            (139) Doing Business, 2015 edition (World Bank).
            (140) Costs of context are defined as negative effects resulting from rules, procedures, actions or missions that hinder business and
                  that are not attributable to the investor, its business or organisation.




88
                                                                                                     5. Structural reforms




Court on Competition, Regulation and Supervision. Another milestone was the approval in 2013 of the
Framework Law for National Regulatory Authorities (NRAs), which strengthened their powers to protect
customers through regulating monopolies in key sectors. Following these developments, the bylaws of the
PCA and the respective NRAs had to be amended to reflect the principles of the new legal framework.
New financing models for the PCA and NRAs were also established. The alienation of the 1 percent share
of CGD in Galp (a situation of special rights by the State that had long been maintained) was
accomplished after several postponements.

The programme enabled a faster pace in these reforms, which are considered positive and adequate
to improve competition law enforcement, though challenges remain. Overall, the programme
measures were adequate to improve the competition framework and the programme accomplishments
were substantial. A proposal for an amended competition law had been prepared by the PCA before the
programme, which was revised so as to implement the orientations set out in the MoU. Stakeholders
consider that the adjustment programme enabled a faster pace in the reforms. The experience with the
new competition court and the enforcement of the 2012 Competition Act are considered positive (141).
The new financing model was also a significant improvement, ensuring a more sustainable base of
resources for the PCA, although it still incorporates uncertainty regarding the transfers from the sectoral
regulators. Also, the current set-up still limits the financial autonomy of the competition authorities.
Adequate resources to be able to act effectively against vested business interests are essential. A stronger
solid basis is also necessary to avoid roll back of reforms.


Public procurement
At the start of the programme, public procurement processes were not fully transparent, fair and
competitive and failed to ensure efficient public spending. Certain provisions of the Portuguese' Public
Procurement Code (PPC) were not compliant with the EU Public Procurement Directives. Moreover, the
effectiveness of the PPC rules was weakened by specific legislation permitting direct awards for certain
types of contracting bodies (eg hospitals, colleges, etc) or special purposes, not subject to the market
discipline of competitive tendering. Also there existed discriminatory practice distorting competition in
favour of firms established in Portugal. Overall, several derogations and practices raised legal issues and
failed to ensure best value for money on purchases by public authorities, undermined the efficient
spending of public money and increased the risks of favouritism and corruption. Portugal was advanced
in the use of e-procurement.

The overall programme objective was to ensure fair public procurement processes. The main
measures aimed at revising the legal framework so as to address, in particular, the regime of the award of
additional works and services, provisions on errors and omissions, and exemptions permitting direct
awards. Other objectives were to strengthen ex ante and ex post audits on public contracts and to upgrade
the public procurement portal (BASE) to improve transparency of procedures.

Programme measures were implemented as scheduled but some of the challenges remain
unaddressed. Early in the programme the national public procurement legal framework was revised to
improve award practices, enhance competition between potential bidders and increase transparency. This
was accompanied by amendments to the Court of Auditor's regulations to strengthen its capacity to
perform ex ante and ex post controls on public contracts. The online platform BASE was also improved,
allowing for more transparency.

Indicators of public procurement processes seem to suggest a positive impact. The number of public
tender contracts has increased and the average value per contract has fallen, which is one of the expected
outcomes of improving award practices to ensure a more transparent and competitive environment. The


(141) Stakeholder consultation.




                                                                                                                        89
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            average value of contracts from direct awarding has also fallen, though not the number of contracts,
            showing that the extensive resorting to direct awarding still prevails.

              40000                                Graph 5.6a: Direct Awards                         90000
                                                                                                             500000                               Graph 5.6b: Public tenders                       7500
                                                                                                     85000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   7000
                                                                                                             450000
              35000                                                                                  80000                                                                                         6500
                                                                                                     75000   400000                                                                                6000

              30000                                                                                  70000                                                                                         5500
                                                                                                             350000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   5000
                                                                                                     65000
                                                                                                             300000                                                                                4500
              25000                                                                                  60000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   4000
                                                                                                     55000   250000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   3500
              20000                                                                                  50000   200000                                                                                3000
                           2011             2012             2013              2014           2015                        2011             2012               2013         2014             2015
                         Average Value per contract, EUR (lhs)          Number of contracts (rhs)                     Average Value per contract, EUR (lhs)           Number of contracts (rhs)

              Source: Portal BASE, PT                                                                           Source: Portal BASE, PT




            Despite these achievements, the programme could have gone much further in the fight against
            corruption, which is perceived as rather widespread in Portugal's public procurement sector. A
            majority of companies (142) believe that corruption is common among both national and regional
            authorities. Procedural irregularities in the awarding of public tenders are a recurring problem for the
            municipalities, some of which suffer from weak monitoring systems, preventing the identification of
            conflicts of interests and favouritism in tender decisions. At firm-level, more than 1/3 of Portuguese
            companies refrained from taking part in tenders due to the perceived tailor-made criteria. Many
            companies consider that corruption prevented them from winning a tender or contract, complain of
            impossible deadlines, collusive biding and deals being agreed upon beforehand, or report it being
            common practice to use bribery to win contracts. PPPs are widely used by the government to launch some
            public works. But weaknesses related to some PPPs at the local level point to insufficient transparency in
            tender procedures and unclear reasoning of award decisions. The programme failed to tackle these
            problems more decisively to reduce the likelihood of encountering corruption in Portugal's procurement
            process.


            Business environment
            At the onset of the programme, Portugal ranked low on many "ease of doing business" indicators.
            The business environment was unfriendly and could be substantially improved. Administrative burdens
            were high, more in the running of a business than in starting one, where major simplifications had already
            taken place (143). Portugal also demonstrated a very high level of licensing complexity (144), with licensing
            procedures discriminatory, not efficient and time consuming. Start-ups suffered from difficulty in getting
            credit and the high tax compliance costs and arrears incurred by public authorities contributed to
            relatively low enterprise survival rate after two years. Payment delays affected disproportionately SMEs
            as they were more affected by liquidity constraints, in particular new companies. Some measures had
            been taken during 2009-2010 to mitigate the effects of the crisis, especially on SMEs, to facilitate access
            to credits and export markets, but needed streamlining to improve efficiency.

            The overall programme objective was to facilitate business by reducing administrative and
            regulatory burdens and support the internationalisation of companies. Measures aimed at
            rationalising existing initiatives dealing with export promotion and access to finance, in particular for
            SMEs, which were highly fragmented. Measures would be taken to promote liquidity conditions for
            business, in particular by the timely implementation of the EU Late Payments Directive. Simplifying
            initiatives, such as the Points of Single Contact, the Simplex Programme and the Zero Authorisation

            (142) European Commission (2014b)
            (143) In the years before the programme, Portugal had eased business start-ups, reducing the time to start a business from 54 to 5
                  days. Doing Business, 2011 – World Bank.
            (144) DG Enterprise and Industry (2010).




90
                                                                                                                                                                                           5. Structural reforms




project, would be deepened. A specific measure to reduce excessive licensing requirements was
introduced later in the programme at the request of the Portuguese authorities.

Action was taken to improve the business environment, though measures were often delayed.
Numerous legal reforms were adopted to ease licensing requirements to businesses in many sectors. The
scope and depth of these reforms was noteworthy, with a number of regimes (industrial, touristic) moving
from an "ex ante" to an "ex post" authorisation. The reforms were often behind schedule, mainly because
administrative capacity was strained for timely adoption. The Late Payments Directive was transposed,
though the Commission later on launched an infringement procedure against Portugal for non-full
compliance because of the excessive number of days allowed for payment in the health sector. Portugal
claimed fiscal problems and incompatibility with the strategy for the settlement of arrears agreed under
the programme (145). The one-in/one-out policy was introduced, according to which no new regulation is
brought in without other regulation being cut by an (at least) equivalent amount. VAT refund procedures
for exports were facilitated. A number of schemes for access to finance for SMEs was also adopted
during the programme, mostly providing loan guarantees and reducing the cost of short-term financing.
Despite these advances, the scope of simplification measures was limited to the central public
administration, not covering the sub-national levels, and implementation of the new licensing regimes at
the local level is heterogeneous.

Some indicators demonstrate a positive impact of these measures. The 2011 "Zero Authorisation"
project aimed at simplifying business establishment by abolishing prior authorisations/licensing,
substituting them with a declaration in an online platform and only ex post compliance verification. This
would increase the number of companies entering the market. Indeed, the evolution of birth rates seems to
pick up slightly since 2011, in particular in economic sectors targeted by the project, like tourism,
industry and commerce (see Graph 5.7a). Overall, Portugal's position in international rankings on ease of
doing business has already improved (see Graph 5.7b).
                              Graph 5.7a: Ease of doing business ranking
 65                                                                                                   20                Graph 5.7b: Birth rate (%) of enterprises by economic activity
                                                                                                      18
 55
                                                                                                      16
 45                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                      12
 35
                                                                                                      10
 25                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                       6
 15
                                                                                                       4
  5                                                                                                    2
  -5    UK         DE         IE        PT         FR        ES         BE         IT        GR        0
                                                                                                              2007         2008           2009         2010          2011          2012    2013
 -15                                                                                                                              Total
 -25                                                                                                                              Manufacturing
                         Change over the period 2015-2010         EDB 2015
                                                                                                                                  Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles
   Source: World Bank.Notes: Selected Countries ordered by ranking in 2015. A positive value of the
                                                                                                                                  Accommodation and food service activities
   change over the period 2015-2010 indicates an improvement in the ranking of the country.
                                                                                                      Source: INE, PT



But overall, Portuguese firms perceive that by the end of the programme, costs of context were not
significantly reduced. Costs of context (146) are among the factors that affect competitiveness more
importantly. A recent survey (147) inquired about five thousand non-financial companies on the potential
obstacles to business' activities and their evolution between 2012 and 2014. The main constraints to
business activity were identified in the judicial system (e.g. judicial length), licensing and certification
procedures, the tax system and the costs associated with the starting of an activity. Notably, companies
did not perceive significant changes to these costs of context between 2012 and 2014 and often indicated



(145) For programme purposes arrears were defined as overdue payments for 90 days or more (Technical Memorandum of
      Understanding). The Late Payments Directive, however, stated that as from 16 March 2013, Member States must ensure that in
      commercial transactions in the health sector the period of payment does not exceeds 60 days following the receipt of the invoice
      by the debtor.
(146) See definition above.
(147) INE (2015).




                                                                                                                                                                                                              91
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            a slight increase in many obstacles. SMEs perceived slightly higher costs of context than large and micro
            enterprises.


            Housing market
            A dysfunctional rental market had characterized the Portuguese housing market for decades, with
            serious implications both on labour mobility and household indebtedness. The rental market was
            characterised by exacerbated tenant protection, including rent control (148), a tendency for perpetuity of
            lease agreements (open-ended contracts that could be transmitted to first degree relatives and were
            essentially not updated) and very restrictive eviction procedures (149). The lack of rental market hampered
            geographical labour mobility and contributed to structural unemployment (150). Strict rental regulations
            were also associated with lower quantity and quality of housing as rents were not sufficient to maintain
            dwellings in good condition (151) and a large number of apartments in city centres remained empty,
            causing a substantial waste of capital and additional costs in terms of transport, environment and tourism
            attractiveness as well as welfare. Moreover, mortgage subsidies through tax incentives had encouraged
            house purchases (152) and pushed the household indebtedness to the highest level in the EU. There was
            also a backlog of undervalued properties.

            The programme housing market reforms aimed at opening up the rental market and provide
            incentives for improving the quality of the housing stock. The main programme goal was to liberalise
            the rental market by phasing out rent controls, while considering the socially vulnerable. In so doing,
            access to housing would be improved and labour mobility fostered. Another aim was to simplify
            administrative procedures for renovations as well as judiciary procedures related to rental contracts.
            Taxation would be modified to level incentives for renting versus acquiring a house and reduce the tax
            bias towards debt financing for homeownership. Another tax reform would rebalance gradually property
            taxation towards the recurrent real estate tax and away from the transfer tax. This would be underpinned
            by a crucial revaluation of the housing stock, so as to bring the taxable value closer to the market value. A
            critical issue was the social aspect. Means-tested social housing should ensure protection of the socially
            vulnerable, while not reducing job-seeking or discouraging low-wage workers from seeking higher paid
            jobs. Overall, the programme designed appropriate policies to tackle distortions in the housing market.

            The long-needed reforms of the housing sector are a significant success of the programme, as they
            finally paved the way towards a more flexible and dynamic housing market. Implementation was
            broadly on target. Reforming the housing sector had been in the Portuguese public debate for decades,
            but no material changes were ever done. The programme served as a catalyser for these long-needed
            reforms. The new Urban Lease Act and a new legal framework for renovation works were updated in
            2012. The redesigned legal framework would allow opening the rental market after a transition period
            (initially foreseen for maximum 5 years), by leaving more freedom to the parts to negotiate contracts,
            reducing the perpetuity of lease contracts, phasing-out rent control mechanisms and giving incentives for
            renovations. The most vulnerable groups of tenants (low-incomes, aged 65 or more or people with proven
            disability) remained relatively more protected. In general, the social aspects became a very sensible issue
            in the housing reform even if social policy is not to be carried out through rent control. The revaluation of
            4.9 million properties was completed in 2013, a major achievement also key to support the planned
            increase in property tax revenues. Remaining tax incentives to home ownership were eliminated but the
            envisaged gradual shift from the transfer tax to recurrent taxation was abandoned without reason. Overall,

            (148) 58% of rental contracts had been set before 1990, mainly with rents frozen for decades due to a 1948 law suspending rent
                  increases in Lisbon and Oporto.
            (149) The tenant-landlord relations indicator (accounting for the ease of tenant eviction, tenure security, deposit requirement)
                  indicated one of the highest levels of tenant protection in the EU. Source: Andrews, D. et al (2011).
            (150) The share of households that had changed residence within the last 2 years was estimated at 5%, one of the lowest mobility
                  rates among EU countries. Source: Andrews, D. et al (2011).
            (151) Dwellings with basic features amounted to 65% of the total in 2001, the lowest among OECD countries.
            (152) The owner-occupancy was up to 75%, one of the highest in EU, while the private rental market had shrunk to about 21% and
                  the social rental sector had stagnated at around 4%.




92
                                                                                                      5. Structural reforms




the Portuguese authorities acknowledged and showed commitment to the long needed housing market
reforms, though proper monitoring of the impact, including reliable monitoring procedures and data, was
afterwards incomplete. It was particularly useful to implement the reform with a relatively long
transitional period, as a shorter implementation timeframe would have had strong social impact and raise
strong opposition. After the end of the programme, further amendments were introduced (eg expanding
the universe of beneficiaries of the phasing out period) which are considered to have weakened the scope
of the reform.

The reforms have produced only marginal results so far, although data and information to
properly assess the outcomes is not available and it is widely accepted that this kind of reforms take
time to materialise given the rather long transitional phase. Tenants' demand seems to have risen, but
the rental market activity is only moderately picking up. Expectations point to a gentle acceleration in the
pace of rental market growth in the near horizon (153), probably higher after the transition period into the
new regime. According to information provided by the authorities, about 44000 out of the existing
250000 old contracts have been updated (February 2014). For stakeholders, the preference for home
ownership has not changed under the new scenario. Actual rents paid by tenants are adjusting at a faster
pace than the overall HCPI, but no more than the housing price index (that measures acquisition prices),
which is growing since mid-2013. The incentives for urban renovation do not seem to be working. Large
areas of the city centres, mainly in Lisbon and Porto, are still degraded and at risk of desertification. The
shadow economy in the rental market is not yet properly evaluated, despite being part of programme
conditionality. Stakeholders consider that the housing market reform facilitated the access to housing
during the crisis to families that could not afford purchasing a property. Overall, the reforms were needed
and went in the right direction, but have not brought the much needed dynamism to the housing market
yet.

5.3.3. Overall assessment of product markets and framework conditions measures in the
       programme

The measures covering product markets and framework conditions were overall well designed to
address existing challenges and were appropriate for the programme objectives. However, the
programme could have prioritised better the most critical areas to render implementation more
effective. The programme essentially tried to address every area where there were factors eroding
competition and unduly increasing domestic production costs. Given that the root cause of the crisis was
broad-based economic inefficiencies across many different sectors, it seems right to have covered all
these areas of reform within the programme. This also reflects the appropriate goal of the programme of
increasing longer-term potential output growth and boosting productivity. Opening different markets to
competition was a way to foster productivity, and tackling rigidities in so many sectors was a way to
improve the quality of the products and services provided and help the economy move up the value-added
chain. However, not all areas had the same importance at the same time and by trying to cover too much,
the programme may have put too much stress on limited capacity constraints, create reform fatigue and
overall achieved too little. It also seems that the programme may have been used to push for a reform
agenda that was on the table (e.g. transposition of numerous EU Directives). One can however question
whether the role of a programme is also to embrace reforms which are meant to happen anyway and in
some cases are not the most critical ones. In particular, in the Portuguese programme it seems that a better
and deeper focus on the most critical issues within each area would have been warranted. Stakeholders
have also reported that some areas were largely overlooked in the programme design. These include
deeper and more systematic measures to fight corruption and fraud, as well as measures on research,
development and innovation that could facilitate a shift towards a new economic model.

Despite relatively high commitment to structural reforms, there were important implementation
failures. There were various reasons for insufficient or delayed implementation. Implementation was

(153) Confidencial Imobiliário – RICS (2015)




                                                                                                                         93
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            weakened when the intended policies turned out to be politically or socially sensitive. This was the case
            in key areas with strong vested interests where many relevant measures were still pending at the end of
            the programme (e.g. energy, regulated professions or ports). The scale of reforms also stretched the
            Portuguese authorities' implementation capacity. In the latter part of the programme, these existing
            challenges appear to have been compounded by reform fatigue.


            5.4.     OVERALL OUTCOME AND ASSESSMENT

            Portugal has been one of the EU's top structural reformers in recent years and simulations suggest
            that recent reforms can have a sizeable positive macroeconomic impact. The OECD indices of
            competitiveness show improvements in Portugal's indicators on product market efficiency and
            employment protection (see graphs earlier in the Section) (154). Moreover, QUEST model simulations
            suggest that reforms implemented under the economic adjustment programme may raise GDP by 2.1% by
            2020 and employment levels by 1.1%. The gains in output are substantial and would add on average more
            than 0.4 pp to growth rates over the next five years (155). The highest impact on GDP seems to come from
            reforms of the employment protection legislation, education programmes and reforms of the
            unemployment benefits. Other OECD analysis (156) also indicates that Portugal is a country with a rather
            high responsiveness to structural reforms.

            Overall, the set of structural reforms set out in the MoU were a broadly adequate response to
            Portugal's long-standing challenge of low potential output growth. The Portuguese programme was a
            difficult one from the outset as it faced the difficult challenge of restoring growth in an economy plagued
            with inefficiencies. In view of this challenge, the programme MoU featured extensive structural reforms,
            which were central to the adjustment strategy. The reforms were necessary to facilitate rebalancing of the
            economy, promote investment and hiring, and ultimately raise potential growth. The high number and
            detail of the structural conditions in the programme design were warranted. Most stakeholders consider
            that they covered Portugal's principal challenges. It was also appropriate to make some compromises on
            reforms to get a decent level of buy-in to the MoU from Portuguese stakeholders. If the programme
            partners had pushed harder for a more radical package of measures it could have risked derailing the
            broad support needed to deliver a meaningful reform.

            The extensive agenda for structural reforms was justified by the fact that one of the root causes of
            the crisis was broad-based economic inefficiencies and distortions. But reforms could have focused
            better on the most critical issues. The core stated objectives of the programme included increasing
            potential output and boosting productivity. To achieve so, the programme included numerous and deep
            structural measures rather than focusing on a few targeted macro-critical issues, reflecting Portugal's
            broad-based economic inefficiencies, which had in aggregate led to very low trend growth. Indeed, unlike
            some other countries, the Portuguese crisis did not just stem from one or two sectors (for example
            housing or finance). The programme partners agreed that all these areas needed to be tackled, at least in

            (154) While these indicators do not fully capture how markets operate in practice, they give a gauge of national progress on structural
                  reforms. From a rather highly-regulated starting point, between 2008 and 2013, Portugal's score on the OECD indicator of
                  product market efficiency declined by 0.4 points, from 1.7 to 1.3, taking the level of regulation to slightly below the euro area
                  average. On the OECD indicator of employment protection Portugal has declined by 0.9 points, from 3.7 to 2.8. The Portuguese
                  labour market is still more regulated than the euro area average, but its reform effort has been the largest in the euro area.
            (155) DG ECFIN (2016b). The analysis for Portugal focuses on structural and tax reforms implemented under the programme and
                  expected to have the highest and more direct macroeconomic impact. They include labour market reforms (reforms to EPL and
                  unemployment benefits), education reforms, product market reforms (liberalisation of professional services, services directive
                  and administrative simplification), reforms in network industries (privatisations in communication sector and transport) and tax
                  reforms throughout 2012-2015. Other reforms were not assessed because they could not be treated analytically in a rigorous
                  manner but they could also have a non-negligible impact. Therefore the estimated impact may give a lower bound of the
                  potential impact of all the reforms undertaken. At the same time, the estimates are surrounded by uncertainties and should be
                  interpreted with caution.
            (156) OECD (2014d)




94
                                                                                                      5. Structural reforms




part, during the programme. The result was that, while more emphasis was put in some important areas
(i.e. labour, judicial and housing reforms), there could have been better prioritisation. The MoU envisaged
a broad step change in the momentum of reform in a country in which necessary reforms had not been
forthcoming. At the same time, ambition and pragmatism could have been better balanced, bearing in
mind limits to administrative and political capacity to address all problems at the same time. In that vein,
in some cases delays in implementation were justified because they allowed better policy decisions to be
taken.

Nevertheless, implementation of structural conditionality was uneven. The overall implementation
rates of structural conditionality was quite high. About 2/3 of the programme conditions were assessed by
the programme teams as being met without delay. However, there were delays and deficiencies in
implementation in some key areas, which have limited the economic impact of the programme. It is clear
that structural reforms were important but difficult to implement. Changing the structure of the economy
following an economic crisis entails a transition period of low wage growth and high unemployment.
Moreover, it is an open question how the programme design can ensure effectiveness and at the same
time foster ownership. The latter is essential and cannot be replaced by other mechanisms. The
Portuguese authorities and social partners showed some reticence about the scope of the structural
reforms, limiting the programme partners' room for manoeuvre. An earlier and more consistent
implementation of these reforms would have had a number of benefits, including improving the economic
outlook and private investors' confidence in Portugal. At the same time, the presence of Tripartite
agreements helped gain the consent of people affected by reforms and limit the level of industrial action
during the programme.

In practice, some structural reforms may not always have been treated as the top priority in the
programme, or were watered down by political and social constraints. It seems that other aspects of
the programme (particularly the fiscal adjustment) were treated as more immediately pressing than
structural reforms, in particular some product market reforms, by the programme partners. For example,
some stakeholders said they found it hard to envisage that inadequate progress on specific structural
conditions would ultimately lead to an assessment of non-compliance (and non-disbursement). In many
cases this may have been due to the tension between the many reforms that would have been
economically desirable and the apparent political and social constraints. On many occasions programme
partners had to strike a difficult balance between pushing for more reforms and avoiding risks of a
political crisis in the government coalition (due to an increasing reform fatigue), or of breaking the social
consensus. In these cases the divergences were settled with rather weak compromises that watered down
the initial scope of reforms.

Structural reforms were meant to be frontloaded, but in practice this was only the case for labour
market reforms. While many of the labour market reforms were implemented in the first year of the
programme, progress on other reforms was slower and patchier. This was probably because the ground
for labour market reforms was better prepared as already agreed with the social partners in March 2011
and because labour market reforms are administratively easier to implement. Delays in other reforms
appear to be partly linked to the relative strength of vested interests. The timing of many reforms was also
influenced by factors including need to conduct social dialogue, the demands placed on the legislative
system, or the desire for transitional periods or protections. (157)

There was no specific target on the sequencing between labour market and product market
reforms. There was awareness that it would in theory be better to do product market reforms first, or at
least concurrently. However this was not judged to be a realistic priority for the programme design given
the relatively short three-year programme horizon. On balance it was right to frontload those labour
market reforms that could be implemented relatively quickly, rather than delay them for reasons of
sequencing. There is also evidence that the short term impact of reforms to EPL and unemployment

(157) Stakeholder consultation.




                                                                                                                         95
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            benefits is more favourable during economic upturns, (158) but again given the urgency of the need for
            reform and the limited duration of the programme this would not have justified delaying the reforms in
            Portugal. But the overall sequencing, effectiveness and fairness of reforms could have been improved by
            faster progress on reforms to product markets and protected sectors. Reforms that involved taking on
            organised vested interests – e.g. in protected sectors such as the energy sector – may have tended to be put
            in place later than those affecting more diffuse groups, or to still be incomplete.

            In the short term structural reforms have contributed to some competitiveness gains, though to
            date growth, investment and productivity outcomes appear modest. Structural reforms have
            contributed to the improvement of the economic situation as marked by some correction of
            macroeconomic imbalances, in particular the closing of the current account deficit. However, these
            achievements are not yet showing signs of feeding into productivity, investment or potential output
            growth. Given the short-term horizon, it would be unfair to blame this only on shortfalls in structural
            reforms. Moreover, the pre-programme starting point was so low that, even where the degree of market
            efficiency and flexibility has improved, it often still falls short of what is needed to facilitate a smooth
            adjustment process within a monetary union and to deliver more growth and jobs. Many of the changes
            that Portugal has been seeking to put in place are intrinsically long-term endeavours, e.g. increasing
            productivity through better education or a more entrepreneurial culture. However Portugal's medium term
            prospects might be better had the implementation of key reforms gone further. In a number of cases they
            only touched the tip of the iceberg.

            This suggests that there may have been some shortcomings in the focus of structural reforms, with
            more attention paid to cost competitiveness/external adjustment, and less to raising investment and
            productivity. While the overall theoretical programme design was probably broadly correct, an opinion
            shared by some stakeholders is that in practice structural reforms were too much focused on raising
            competitiveness through wage cuts and labour deregulation. In their view other essential measures were
            missing, including policies to promote research and innovation, renewable energies, workers'
            qualifications and skills, liberalisation of some markets and promotion of productivity-enhancing
            investment in knowledge-based capital.

            From a firm-level perspective, evidence suggests that some structural reforms in the programme
            are perceived as having had a positive impact (in particular labour market reforms) but further
            progress is needed. Besides measures trying to link reform indicators to macroeconomic outcomes, the
            effectiveness of structural reforms can also be assessed from a firm-level perspective. At that level,
            structural reforms are expected to reduce costs, thus impacting on the firm's competitiveness and growth
            prospects. A recent IMF firm-level survey (159) suggests that firms perceived a most positive impact from
            programme labour market reforms and a less positive one from product market reforms. In particular,
            increasing work time flexibility, reducing the cost of hiring and firing and active labour market policies
            are perceived as those labour market reforms having had a strong positive impact, while reforms of
            collective bargaining received low scores. On the other hand, none of the product market reforms are
            perceived as having had a significant positive impact on firms' competitiveness.

            Clearer communication of the necessity of structural reforms and its longer-term prospect might
            have helped overcome some of the resistance to reforms. Although the initial MoU linked the package
            of reforms with analysis of economic challenges and the necessity of adjustment, communication of the
            relationship between timely and effective implementation of structural measures and the programme
            goals could have been more consistent. At the same time, the scope of the reforms needed meant it should
            have been better communicated that a three years programme could only be the starting point of a

            (158) Duval, R., Furceri, D. (2016)
            (159) The survey was sent to non-financial firms at the beginning of March 2015, targeting a group of about 200 large firms and
                  about 300 SMEs. The response rate was 17.4 percent. Objections to using firm surveys to assess the impact of structural
                  reforms include that the answers may extract opinions not related to the outcomes of reforms and also firms not being able to
                  disentangle cyclical effects of the crisis from the impact of reforms. IMF (2015c)




96
                                                                                                   5. Structural reforms




necessarily longer-term reform process. The complementarity of reforms could also have been
emphasised more. Some stakeholders in the consultation also supported this view.

At the end of the programme, there was still a lack of systematic assessment of the impact of
structural reforms, though Portugal is making some progress. Evidence about the real economic
impact of the programme reforms, which is important both for communication and further policy
development, is scarce. Ex post monitoring and analysis of reforms implemented under the programme
remains patchy, notwithstanding the good monitoring system put in place for schools. A clearer analytical
framework for assessing the prospective payoffs from structural reforms ex-ante could help inform
expectations and improve communication during the programme.




                                                                                                                      97
6.            BANKING SECTOR POLICIES


6.1.    KEY CHALLENGES AND PROGRAMME DESIGN

The Portuguese banking sector vulnerabilities mirrored the weaknesses of the domestic
economy. The banks' positive profitability, recorded until 2010, was the reflection of the risks the banks
had taken, domestically and abroad. In fact, banks had expanded their balance sheet during the first years
of the crisis. The overextended public sector meant that the interconnection between the banks and the
sovereign was stronger than suggested by the banks' holding of domestic government bonds, amounting
to more than 4% of total assets in mid-2011. In fact, banks were lending to SOEs, some of which were
structurally loss-making and covered by explicit or implicit government guarantees. Credit to non-
financial corporations and households was mostly intermediated by the banks at conditions that eased
over time, due to declining risk premia in the context of the Great Moderation. As a result, private debt
exceeded 200% of GDP in mid-2011 and posed further potential risks on the banks' balance sheet. Banks
had diversified around one fifth of their assets in foreign countries; while this helped protect them
somewhat from the domestic slowdown, it resulted in the exposure to the then troubled EA economies of
Spain, Ireland, and Greece, amounting to around 3.5%, 3.0%, 1.5% of total assets, respectively. Some
banks had also significant South American and African operations, which were contributing to increase
their profits as much as their risks. (160)

The vulnerability related to the banks' unstable funding sources was already unfolding its effects.
The role of the banking system in intermediating the country's financing needs with external financing,
including through interbank lending, was reflected in the Loan-to-Deposit (LTD) ratio, which reached a
peak of 167% in mid-2010. Then, the banks' financing difficulties, which had already started in early
2009, culminated in the loss of access to the international debt markets. Subsequently, thanks to the
availability of eligible collateral, the banks increasingly relied on the Eurosystem financing, whose
amount reached over €40bn (around 8% of banks' liabilities) in mid-2011. A prompt fixing of the
situation required a decisive adjustment of the banks' balance sheet, which in turn required stringent
supervisory actions, in the absence of other incentives for the banks to promptly move ahead.

The banking sector was rather concentrated and presented some inefficiency. The three largest banks
- Caixa Geral de Depósitos (CGD), Banco Comercial Português (BCP) and Banco Espírito Santo (BES) -
accounted for more than half of the total bank assets. Banks' inefficiencies were indicated, for instance,
by the ratio between population and branches, which was among the lowest in EA, below 1,700. (161)
CGD was state-owned. It accounted for more than 20% of the banks' total assets and had a leading
position in customer lending and deposits, property leasing and insurance. In particular, it had a large
presence in the SOEs and in the mass customer segments, and tended to record lower operating profits
than its peers. As a result, CGD might have arguably played a benchmarking role, undercutting
competition in the sector. BCP and BES were privately owned and presented complex ownership
structures, with exposure to non-financial businesses.

The programme envisaged strengthening the banking sector in view of the need to address the
country's economic imbalances. The banking sector was expected to face considerable challenges, as a
consequence of the needed correction of the country's structural imbalances. The programme strategy
envisaged increasing the banks' resilience to delink their market access from the sovereign one and to
reduce reliance on Eurosystem financing, while ensuring adequate liquidity to avert a credit crunch. If
banks failed to raise sufficient capital in the markets, temporary public provision of equity by the state
was envisaged. For this purpose, the programme envelope contained €12bn to be disbursed to the Bank
Solvency Support Facility (BSSF).



(160) Source: BIS data.
(161) Source: ECB (2010) and ECB (2013a).




                                                                                                             99
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Capital provisions by the State to the banks had to comply with EU state aid rules. This need was
            also stated by the programme conditionality. In accordance with the "2008 Banking Communication", the
            Member State granting the aid provided commitments to a set of measures, on the basis of a restructuring
            plan, that aimed at (i) ensuring the bank's return to viability, (ii) addressing distortions of competition,
            and (iii) minimising the use of public money through appropriate burden sharing by the bank. If the return
            to viability was not plausible, the bank was to be wound down in an orderly manner. Until 2013, state aid
            could be granted as rescue aid on a temporary basis before a restructuring plan approval; burden-sharing
            by subordinated debt was not required. (162) The "2013 Banking Communication", applicable since
            August 2013, complemented the framework, by generally requiring prior state aid approval before any
            recourse to public funds and burden sharing through conversion or write-down of hybrid capital and sub-
            debt holders.

            Under the programme, the process of strengthening the banking sector was to start immediately
            and proceed gradually, under the supervision of Banco de Portugal (BdP). Before the programme,
            the required Core Tier 1 capital ratio was set at 8%. Under the programme, it was increased to 9% to be
            met by end-2011 and 10% to be met by end-2012. Banks were required to submit "solvency and funding"
            plans to BdP by June 2011, with the aim of detailing the paths to meeting capital requirements and
            stabilizing their funding profile. Being responsible for the banking supervision, BdP was envisaged to
            assess the banks' "solvency and funding" situation, including under stress scenarios, on a quarterly basis,
            with the support of the programme partners. BdP was also envisaged to design a special programme of
            on-site inspections by June 2011; and to enhance the disclosure requirements on provisioning by
            September 2011. It also committed to improve its governance and internal capabilities. With regard to
            bank resolution, a framework was to be introduced by November 2011 and the Deposit Guarantee Fund
            was to be strengthened by December 2011.

            The programme contained specific conditionality for the state-owned Banco Português de Negócios
            (BPN) and CGD, aiming at reducing risks and costs for the state. BPN - a relatively small bank - had
            been nationalized and had been put under "deep restructuring" in late 2008. CGD had supported the
            restructuring of BPN, including by providing around €5bn financing lines. The BPN restructuring plan, as
            presented in September 2010, envisaged splitting the entity into a "bad bank" and a "good bank". The
            programme envisaged accelerating the process, allowing for more troubled assets to be transferred to the
            bad bank, with the aim of re-privatizing the good bank by July 2011. Under the programme, CGD
            assistance to BPN was to be phased-out, including through the settlement by the state of the liquidity
            support. Moreover, CGD was to be streamlined, by increasing its capital with its own internal resources,
            through a sale of its insurance and health arms, and – if needed – other non-core subsidiaries. The
            programme did not envisage the full privatization of CGD, which could have contributed to reduce
            further the cost and contingent liabilities for the state, and possibly fostered competition in the sector.

            The programme contained requirements to deal with high private debt and provide credit to the
            viable firms. The MoU required to start monitoring the level and evolution of private debt and to define
            the principles of an out-of court debt restructuring framework by September 2011; and to amend the
            Insolvency law, with technical assistance from the IMF, by November 2011. This was intended to
            facilitate the orderly and efficient correction of the country's imbalances, supporting the shift of resources
            to the most productive sectors. The capital re-allocation also required consistent provision of credit to
            viable businesses. With regard to bank lending, while projecting some asset downsizing as a consequence
            of the banks' balance sheet adjustment, the programme partners envisaged BdP to monitor, with their
            support, the consistency of the adjustment process with the macro developments. The programme partners
            also encouraged the assessment of the existing system of government guarantees for SMEs and of the
            extra-bank financing alternatives, without indicating stringent deadlines and medium term objectives.


            (162) Such burden-sharing by subordinated creditors was implemented in Spain already in 2012, anticipating the EU legislative
                  changes. See "Evaluation of the Financial Sector Assistance Programme Spain, 2012-2014", page 43 and Section 4.2.2




100
                                                                                                                                                         6. Banking sector policies




6.2.      PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION


6.2.1. Strengthening the banking sector

Part of the banks' initial capital needs resulted from requirements that were defined outside the
programme context and related to the banks' holdings of sovereign bonds. In 2011, banks' capital
needs resulted mainly from the increased required capital ratio and the introduction of temporary
sovereign buffers. The latter were designed by the European Banking Authority (EBA) and intended for
all major EU banks. (163) Limited additional needs resulted from the transfer of the banks' pension funds
to the social security system, and the impairment charges following the Special Inspections Programme
(SIP). (164) No further capital needs resulted from the "solvency and funding" assessment and the related
stress tests, as supervised and coordinated by the BdP. These stress tests were initially not as thorough as
the situation might have warranted; they were not based on a comprehensive third-party modelling and
lacked full transparency with regard to assumptions and granular results. (165) Covering the capital needs
was expected to make the banks better equipped to deal with their vulnerabilities, such as the nexus with
their own sovereign and the quality of their loan books. The prominent role of the temporary sovereign
buffers in defining the capital needs can be seen as reflecting the high perceived importance and urgency
of tackling the bank-sovereign nexus. The inspections and the stress tests played a marginal role and, with
hindsight, underestimated the potential problems related to the banks' loan books, especially in the case of
a worse-than-expected downturn.

Table 6.1:
Banks' recapitalization (1)

                                                                CGD               BES               BCP                BPI              Banif               Total
CoCos (€bn)                                                     0.9                  -                3.0               1.5               0.4               5.8
Equity (€bn)                                                    0.8                 1.0               0.5               0.2 (2)           1.2               3.7
Total Capital contribution (€bn)                                1.7                1.0               3.5               1.5                1.6               9.3
by the State (€bn)                                              1.7                  -                3.0               1.5               1.1                7.3
by private investors (€bn)                                       -                  1.0               0.5               0.2 (2)           0.5               2.2
Recap as % of CT1 Dec 11                                        25.0               17.0              68.0              66.0              172.1              40.0
2012 CT1                                                        11.6               10.5              12.4              15.0              11.1               11.2
(1) The recapitalization of BPN amounted to €0.6bn. The bank is not included in the table as it was subject to a "deep restructuring process", which
drove the recapitalization. It was not subject to either SIP or the EBA Capital Exercise. The capital injection occurred earlier than for other banks.
(2) The proceeds were used to repurchase EUR 200 million worth of CoCos.
Source: Standard and Poor's, Banks' financial accounts, Portuguese authorities.



Covering the banks' capital needs - as identified by the supervisory authority - occurred rather
smoothly. The capital needs were to be covered by mid-2012. This in fact occurred, with the exception of
Banif. As a result of its slow streamlining, strengthening the capital of the state-owned CGD required
€1.7bn injection by the state, provided outside the BSSF facility. (166) The capital of the privately owned
banks was strengthened mainly through new capital injections, from private funds (€2.2bn) and BSSF
funds (€5.6bn). This was facilitated by the flexibility of the programme partners, which allowed
accelerating the disbursement of the funds. The envelope was sufficient to cover the capital needs, as

(163) In December 2011, EBA recommended to introduce exceptional and temporary buffers to reach 9% Core Tier 1 capital ratio by
      the end of June 2012, after a prudent valuation of sovereign debt exposures to reflect market prices as at the end of September
      2011. Sovereign buffer for CGD, BES, BPI and BCP amounted to around €3.7bn.
(164) In December 2011, BdP announced the results of the first phase of SIP, which consisted of (i) the validation of the credit risk
      capital requirement and (ii) the valuation of the credit portfolio of the 8 largest Banking Groups. The valuation was performed
      by two independent accounting firms, covered assets worth €281bn and yielded additional impairment of €840 million (i.e.
      0.30% of the assessed assets, or 9.1% of the total impairment related to the covered investments).
 165
( ) Initial tests were based on different banks' asset classification methods, risk parameters and deleveraging assumptions. The tests
      did not cover all risk factors, particularly with regard to some market and liquidity risks. In early 2012, the third SIP work-
      stream - performed by a specialised consulting firm - aimed at assessing the stress-test parameters and methodologies. Further
      improvements of the stress testing infrastructure were recorded in 2013. The 10th programme review recognized that a proper
      top-down stress testing framework had only been developed by then. See also IMF (2014a), Box 3.
(166) The sale of the insurance arm (Caixa Seguros), initially intended for 2012, was completed in January 2014.




                                                                                                                                                                                101
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            identified by the supervisor, leaving €6.4bn unused, until the end of the programme. Most (€5.8bn) of the
            public capital injection was in the form of contingent convertible notes (CoCos). (167) (Table 6.1) Bearing
            high interest rates and a strong dilution for existing shareholders, especially in the case of
            conversion, these instruments were expected to provide adequate remuneration for the State and
            incentives for the banks to improve their management and risk-pricing, in order to be able to repay them
            before conversion. By the same token, CoCos contributed, only to a limited extent, to lowering the banks'
            cost of capital.

            Banks that received state aid were subject to restructuring plans that contributed to their return to
            viability. The restructuring plans of CGD, BPI and BCP were approved in mid-2013. (168) The aid to
            Banif was granted on a temporary basis as rescue aid, (169) while the draft restructuring plans did not
            dispel the prevailing doubts on the bank's viability. On the basis of the then applicable rules, burden
            sharing and compensatory measures were ensured through bans on coupon, dividends and buybacks, and
            dilution of existing shareholders (including by high CoCos coupons). (170) The banks' return to viability
            was to be ensured, over five years, through restructuring of the banks' business models and operations.
            The depth of restructuring depended on the amount of aid received. The restructuring plans were meant to
            address the banks' funding gap and restore adequate cost structures and margins, so as to reinforce their
            capital position over time. They foresaw disposal of non-core (mainly foreign) activities, while preserving
            core domestic lending activities, which were however expected to decline, also in view of the declining
            credit demand. With hindsight, the plans contributed to improving viability, in particular where the
            restructuring was deep, while the restructuring for some banks is still ongoing. However, in the view of
            some stakeholders, the combination of the CoCos remuneration and the planned assets' downsizing
            brought negative effects on the banks' credit supply and business diversification. Having covered its
            capital needs through private sources, BES was not subject to a restructuring plan approved by the EU
            Commission. (See Box 6.1)

                               Graph 6.1a: Tier1 Capital                             Graph 6.1b: Non performing to Total Gross Loans,
                                                                             20                            Ratio
             17


             14                                                              15



             11                                                              10



              8                                                               5


              5                                                               0
                    Q4   Q2   Q4   Q2   Q4   Q2   Q4   Q2   Q4   Q2                Q4 Q2 Q4 Q2 Q4 Q2 Q4 Q2 Q4 Q2 Q4
                   2009 2010 2010 2011 2011 2012 2012 2013 2013 2014              2009 2010 2010 2011 2011 2012 2012 2013 2013 2014 2014
                            Portugal           Spain         Italy                        Portugal         Spain             Italy
                            Germany            France                                     Germany          France

                  Source: ECB, IMF


            The extent of the troubled loans' problem was not immediately foreseen. It surfaced thanks to
            improvements in the banks' asset quality assessments. In 2011, as envisaged by the MoU, BdP issued


            (167) CoCos are subordinated loss absorption instruments, which contingently mandatorily convert into common equity or which
                  contain contingent mandatory principal write-down features. In Portugal, CoCos bore step-up coupons between 8% and 10%;
                  they contributed to the CT1 and were to be automatically converted if not repaid by maturity (2017).
             168
            ( ) See SA.35062, SA.35238 and SA.34724.
            (169) "The Commission considered that [such] a plan, […], needs to provide for a material overhaul of the bank's business model,
                  […] or an orderly winding-up if the bank cannot return to viability." SA.34662 BANIF – Rescue decision of 21 Jan 2013.
            (170) In 2011, BES, BPC, BPI and Banif had launched voluntary Liability Management Exercises (LMEs), mainly in the form of
                  exchange or tender offers with discounts between 30% and 50% of the bonds' nominal value, to meet the 9% minimum capital
                  requirement; in 2013, Banif performed an additional LME.




102
                                                                                                                           6. Banking sector policies




a definition of non-performing loans (NPLs) that improved transparency and international comparability
but remained arguably narrower than in other countries. (171) In late December 2013, following the EBA
reporting standards on NPLs, BdP strengthened the criteria for a loan to be marked as restructured. Four
yearly rounds of on-site inspections, performed under the BdP supervision, improved the banks' asset
quality assessment and governance. These results were achieved gradually. The valuations' granularity
and the ensuing impairment charges increased during the subsequent rounds. (172) The process of
integrating the assessments in the "stress tests" also required time. In early 2014, following the
completion of the inspections, BdP revised the guidelines on measuring credit portfolio impairment. (173)

NPL volumes kept on increasing, as new troubled loans appeared while effective supervisory
policies to tackle the existing ones were not promptly introduced. (Graph 6.1b) The problematic loans
were initially concentrated in the construction and commercial real estate sectors, but they gradually
extended to different corporate sectors, especially non-tradable, and - to a minor extent - to consumer
financing, as the worse-than-expected macroeconomic outlook and the high debt levels unfolded their
effects. NPLs increased in particular among small and micro companies. The increase of NPLs as a
percentage of total loans partly reflects the reduction of total loans in the denominator. BdP promoted
debt restructuring through Pillar 1/Pillar 2 but did not impose targets and/or capital (dis)incentives for not
restructured or not written-off loans. These were not required by the MoU either. A more demanding
reduction of NPLs would have been beneficial. It could have resulted in the crystallization of some losses
for the banks, potentially triggering additional capital needs, but would have contributed to accelerate the
balance sheet healing.

The banks' only gradual recognition of losses and the absence of both active distressed markets and
alternative facilitating mechanisms contributed to limit the disposal of troubled loans. The set-up of
a state-sponsored asset management company (AMC) to deal with NPLs was not introduced in the
conditionality; besides the state's limited capacity to provide guarantees, due to its already high debt and
contingent liabilities, the heterogeneity of the NPLs would have limited the benefits of an AMC. (174) In
this context, the banks transferred only limited amounts of NPLs to "credit recovery funds", owned by
pools of banks and specialized in companies' turnaround. Specific guarantees schemes related to
performing but low yielding "tracker mortgages" were considered in the conditionality in early 2013, but
eventually dropped; the state's scarce capacity to provide guarantees, in the absence of EA/EU risk
sharing tools to provide supranational guarantees, impeded such a mechanism. (175)

The need of adjusting the banks' funding structure was translated in a LTD target, which was met
before the end of the programme. In line with their funding plans submitted to the BdP, banks had to
gradually reduce their LTD ratio from around 150% to 120% by 2014, requiring an adjustment of around
€40bn (or 23% of GDP) to be split between loans and deposits. (176) The government guarantees ceiling
on newly issued debt was increased to €35bn, facilitating the banks' access to the Eurosystem during the


(171) Instruction 22/2011, Banco de Portugal. The definition included (i) loans in arrears for 90 days or more, (ii) certain restructured
      loans whose overdue payments were capitalized, only if not adequately collateralized, (iii) weak loans, only if the borrower was
      under insolvency or bankruptcy. See also Barisitz, S. (2013).
(172) In addition to the 2011 SIP, the 2012 On-site Inspections Programme (OIP) covered assets worth €69bn and required additional
      impairments of €860 million. Subsequently, The ETTRIC identified additional impairments of €1.12bn in 2013 and €1.0bn in
      2014, bringing the total required additional impairment amount to €3.82bn.
(173) In 2014, after the programme terminated, BdP established an early warning system with a view to ensure provisioning on the
      weakest exposure.
(174) An AMC would also have been subject to EU state aid rules, in particular those on impaired asset measures, applicable since
      2009. For the selective role of AMC in exploiting economies of scopes and supporting the development of distressed markets,
      see Klingebiel D. (2001) and IMF (2015c).
 175
( ) Tracker mortgages bore low (around 100bps) life-time margin over Euribor, not contributing positively to the net interest rate
      margin. The guarantees were expected to improve the credit rating of the senior tranches, resulting from the securitization of the
      mortgages, thus reducing their funding costs and/or increasing their disposal prices. The mechanism would have worked by
      embedding the remuneration of the guarantees probably with a form of aid, which would have been subject to state aid scrutiny.
(176) The target was formally introduced with the 1st programme review, after the banks' submission of the funding plans detailing
      their deleveraging paths for the period 2011-2015.




                                                                                                                                                  103
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            LTD adjustment process. (177) The initial banks' plans relied on increasing the deposit base, while
            continuing to support lending to viable firms; it worked initially, as retail deposits grew by around €1bn
            per month until November 2011, when the BdP introduced effective mechanisms to limit the increase of
            the interest rate offered by the banks on deposits. (178) Having been substantially met in 2013Q2, the LTD
            targets were dropped from the 7th review. (Graph 6.2b) The progress in LTD ratio helped reducing the
            reliance on the Eurosystem. By the end of the programme, the Eurosystem lending decreased from a peak
            of €60bn to around €40bn. (Graph 6.2a) Further reduction was constrained by the banks' continued and
            sizable buying up and re-financing of short-term domestic public debt, which was facilitated by the ECB
            non-standard measures and contributed to the government's financing needs and the banks' profitability.
            (179)

                                 Graph 6.2a: Eurosystem Borrowing
             80       € Bn                                                                                     Graph 6.2b: Loan to Deposit Ratio
                                                                                         190     %                                                          € Bn       190


                                                                                         170                                                                           170
             60

                                                                                         150                                                                           150
             40
                                                                                         130                                                                           130

             20
                                                                                         110                                                                           110


              0                                                                           90                                                                           90
              Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15                       2009Q4        2010Q4        2011Q4        2012Q4          2013Q4

                                                                                                 HH deposits (rhs)       NFC deposits (rhs)          Loans to deposits lhs)
              Source: Banco de Portugal, Programme documents




                                                               Graph 6.3: Bank assets and liabilities                               - ASSETS
              600      € Bn
                                                                                                                                   Equity andinvestment fund units

              400                                                                                                                  Remaining Assets
                                                                                                                                   Debt securities
              200
                                                                                                                                   Loans, others

                  0                                                                                                                Loans to Non-MFIs, excl. CG
                                                                                                                                    - LIABILITIES
              -200
                                                                                                                                   Deposits, Non-MFIs excl. CG

              -400                                                                                                                 Deposits, others
                                                                                                                                   Debt Securities Issued
              -600                                                                                                                 Remaining Liabilities
                         2007        2008       2009           2010         2011         2012           2013         2014
                                                                                                                                   Capital & Reserves
                  Source: Banco de Portugal


            Negative net credit flows drove the protracted reduction of the bank loans and total assets. The
            loans' reduction continued after the LTD target was met and amounted to almost 20% of the mid-2011
            levels. (Graph 6.3) The reduction of the stock of loans did not result much from the NPLs workout and
            other loans' disposal, but rather from the negative net credit flows, which drove also the reduction of the

            (177) At the time, banks were allowed by the ECB to post government guaranteed bonds as collateral in the Eurosystem refinancing
                  operations. In July 2011, ECB suspended the minimum requirements for credit quality thresholds of bonds issued or guaranteed
                  by the Portuguese Government, ensuring their eligibility for refinancing operations irrespectively of the rating.
            (178) The BdP required banks to hold additional capital against deposits offering more than 300 bps above Euribor. In February 2012,
                  the cap was further narrowed to 225 bps.
            (179) ECB non-standard measures included the fixed-rate full allotment and the lengthening of the maximum maturity of the Longer
                  Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs). See ECB (2011)




104
                                                                                                                              6. Banking sector policies




banks' assets, amounting to around 15% of the mid-2011 levels. The downsizing was slower and more
protracted than in some other programme countries, notably Ireland and, to a minor degree, Spain.

The implementation of the bank resolution framework occurred rather swiftly. The new regime for
the resolution of distressed credit institutions was introduced in February 2012. (180) The measures set out
in the new regime aimed at recovering or preparing the orderly winding-up of credit institutions and
certain financial companies in situations of financial distress. The new toolbox included three stages of
intervention by BdP, namely corrective measures, the appointment of an interim board and resolution
measures. Banks were required to contribute to the Resolution Fund up to €200million in a year and up to
€2bn in 10 years and to submit resolution plans to the supervisor. This was an important programme
achievement, as also confirmed on the occasion of the post-programme resolution of Banif and BES.

The restructuring of BPN was slower than originally envisaged and left some legacies beyond the
end of the programme. The attempt to sell the good bank by July 2011 failed, due to the lack of
appropriate buyers' interest. The sale was completed in March 2012, following the recapitalization by the
state of €0.6bn, the agreement with Banco BIC to buy the good bank, and the final approval of the
restructuring plan by the European Commission under EU state aid rules. (181) The bank’s distressed
assets were transferred at their book value of around €4bn to the Portuguese state and isolated in three
special purpose vehicles (SPVs), Parvalorem (loan portfolio), Parups (real estate and other assets), and
Parparticipadas (shares in companies). The disposal process of the distressed assets required outsourcing
some management functions and did not progress much before the end of the programme. The liquidity
support, extended by CGD, was transferred from BPN to the state-owned SPVs and was agreed - among
the authorities and the programme partners - to be settled by the government only gradually, so as to
reduce the funding pressure for the state. As a result, CGD was still financing the state-owned SPVs for
an amount larger than €3.5bn, when the programme terminated.




(180) Decree-Law No 31-A/2012 of 10 February 2012. This was followed by a number of operational instructions and notices by the
      BdP in 2012/13 and eventually supplemented by the Decree-Law No 114-A/2014 and No 114-B/21, after the programme
      terminated. The 2014 Decree Laws aimed at better aligning the national framework to the emerging BRRD, in particular by (i)
      introducing the no creditor worse off principle, (ii) clarifying the scope of the use of the Resolution Fund, and (iii) clarifying the
      scope of liabilities that could be transferred within the resolution process.
(181) See SA. 26909 (2011/C), Commission Decision for the restructuring of Banco Portuguese de Negocios




                                                                                                                                                     105
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                             Box 6.1: The process of adjusting BES and Banif

                Despite the disappointing performance in the 2011 EBA stress test, (1) BES maintained a relatively
                positive outlook among credit and equity analysts, throughout the programme. (2) The convoluted
                structure of the Espírito Santo Group posed corporate governance's issues and - at the same time -
                contributed to mask its underlying vulnerabilities. In mid-2013, at the request of the programme
                partners, BdP moved to reform BES' governance structure. It ordered prudential provisions for
                intra-group holdings and the audit of the ultimate parent company's (Espírito Santo International -
                ESI) accounts, which identified - in the first half of 2014 - “omissions in the accounting of
                liabilities” and “overvaluations of assets”. (3) In July 2014, after the programme terminated, BES
                posted losses of €3.6bn, which lowered its capital ratio to about 5%. The main source of troubles
                leading to the record losses was represented by the leveraged and illiquid operations – especially
                in Angola – of some Group's holding companies (ESI, Rioforte, Espírito Santo Financial Group -
                ESFG), to which BES was exposed through loans, securities and guarantees. (4) In August 2014,
                the Portuguese authorities decided to resolve BES by splitting its operations into a bridge bank
                (Novo Banco) and a bad bank, which was set to receive some assets, related to the Espírito Santo
                Group, and junior liabilities. (5) The large amount of aid granted on this occasion was approved by
                the EU Commission, which will assess the viability of the resulting entity when Novo Banco is
                sold. The Commission decisions concerning Novo Banco did not approve a restructuring plan,
                which was not required given the nature of the aid and the bridge bank's temporary setup. (6)
                Differently from other banks, most of the capital needs of Banco Internacional do Funchal (Banif)
                resulted from losses recorded in 2012 as well as circular capital. (7) In light of the uncertainty on
                its viability, the resolution of Banif was considered already at the time. (8) The Portuguese
                authorities did not resolve the bank and granted Banif with the most significant public support, as
                a percentage of its existing capital, among the main Portuguese banks. However, the concerns on
                the bank's viability could not be dissipated. (9) In July 2015, the European Commission opened a
                formal investigation on the aid, as the banks' return to viability could not be demonstrated and the
                bank could not reimburse €125 million of CoCos due in December 2014. As attempts to sell the
                bank without further state aid were not successful, the Portuguese authorities put Banif into
                resolution at the end of December 2015. (10) In this context, BdP - the Resolution Authority -
                selected the bid of Banco Santander Totta to acquire about €11.1 billion of assets and liabilities,
                while transferring impaired assets of about €2.2 billion (net book value) to an asset management
                vehicle owned by the Resolution Fund. In the resolution, public support of up to €3bn was
                approved, in addition to the aid previously granted. (11)

                (1) The 2011 EBA stress test covered BES' financial holding, EFSG. The 2012 CT1 capital was projected at 5.1% - the
                     lowest of the covered Portuguese banks - under the adverse scenario. As the threshold had been fixed at 5%, the bank
                     did not have to be immediately recapitalized, but it had to strengthen its capital position. Both ESFG and BES took
                     actions to increase their capital in 2011, partly through intra-group operations.
                 2
                ( ) In June 2014, the bank raised around €1 billion of new capital in a share sale. At the time, BES' credit rating was
                     Ba3/B+ and the equity analysts' assessment was stable/positive (10% Sell, 50% Hold, 40% Buy).
                (3) http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/6d228e6c-e802-11e3-b923-00144feabdc0.html#axzz4BMVdpHFs
                 4
                ( ) The exposure had increased in June and July 2014, despite the prohibition of BdP.
                     See: https://www.bportugal.pt/en-US/OBancoeoEurosistema/Esclarecimentospublicos/Pages/infobes.aspx
                (5) In December 2015, BdP - the Resolution Authority - completed the resolution measure; it made an adjustment to the
                     perimeter of the assets and liabilities transferred to Novo Banco and imposed losses on some €2bn senior debtholders.
                (6) See SA.39250 and SA.43976 Resolution of Banco Espirito Santo
                (7) SA.34662 BANIF – Rescue decision
                (8) http://observador.pt/2016/05/17/vitor-gaspar-banco-portugal-determinante-na-injecao-fundos-no-banif-troika-nao-
                     opos/; http://observador.pt/2016/04/01/banif-banco-portugal-preparou-resolucao-desde-2012/
                (9) "[…] the rating agency believes that there is a very high likelihood that further government support will be needed to
                     ensure the bank's future financial viability." Moody's rating action of 15 April 2013
                (10) In Dec-15, BdP stated that "[…] the absence of an approved restructuring plan, worsened by a less favourable
                     economic environment, led to significant negative deviations of Banif’s results from the projected amounts."
                (11) See SA.36123 Rentipar/BANIF – Restructuring decision – PT, SA.43977 Resolution of Banif




106
                                                                                                                     6. Banking sector policies




6.2.2. Unwinding the imbalances

The process of revising the insolvency frameworks was appropriate but not decisive in fostering
private debt restructuring. The amendment of the insolvency law was introduced in spring 2012, with a
limited delay compared with programme plans. Later in the year, both in-court fast-track mechanisms
and out-of-court tools were made operational to facilitate the solution of the insolvency cases. (182) In
light of the significant backlog of court cases experienced in Portugal at the start of the programme, it was
appropriate to promote out-of court agreements. However, the tools experienced a mixed take-up, and
required some amendment to improve the early recovery and the preservation of the most productive
firms. After the end of the programme, room for improvement in the corporate restructuring tools was
still recorded. (183) With regard to household debt, as envisaged by the conditionality, new general and
extraordinary regimes were introduced in winter 2012/13 to encourage agreement between creditors and
banks on debt restructuring. The general regime required banks to develop risk management systems to
monitor and prevent borrowers' risk of default, hence contributing to shape a cultural change in banks’
approach to household credit risk.

Initiatives to foster bank lending to the real economy brought mixed results. To facilitate bank
lending to viable firms, the Portuguese authorities acted on both credit supply and demand. They sought
to extend financing commitments from banks. (184) They also aimed at strengthening the risk profile of
the borrowers by providing guarantees, through the National Guarantee System (NGS). This increased the
state contingent liabilities, but did not boost lending activity. By the end of 2012, the government made
available two tranches of guaranteed credit lines for SMEs totalling €3bn. In reaction to the low take up
of these instruments, the conditionality - as updated in early 2013 - envisaged a reform of the NGS aiming
at designing a more competitive, transparent and accountable system. (185) A further €2bn of guarantees
was made available at a later stage. Further initiatives to facilitate banks' lending to SMEs were gradually
introduced in the conditionality and properly implemented. They included the enhancement of the
national corporate sector databases, notably the central bank-managed Central Credit Registry and the
Corporate Balance Sheet Database, broadening the scope of data available to credit institutions with the
aim of facilitating the credit risk assessment.

Initiatives to foster extra-bank lending were introduced relatively slowly, as the authorities and the
programme partners increased their focus on this only after stabilizing the banks. In December
2012, an agreement with the EIB/EIF allowed Portuguese counterparts – including those suffering from
credit downgrades as a result of the economic recession – to benefit from further external financing. (186)
The authorities' assessment and preliminary proposals on the diversification of financing alternatives for
corporates, envisaged under the original MoU, were also concluded in the second half of 2012.
Subsequently, the conditionality – as updated in early 2013 - encouraged further analysis on developing
the commercial paper market through regulatory and tax changes and the promotion of pooled issuance of
corporate debt. At the beginning of January 2014, the authorities revised the regulatory and tax
environment for commercial paper, but opted for not pursuing the promotion of pooled debt issuance,
which would have provided an alternative long-term financing option.

The Development Financial Institution (DFI) was set-up only after the end of the programme, as
ensuring a proper functioning of the institution required some effort. In addition to EIB/EIF

(182) The SIREVE, mediated by IAPMEI, targets essentially micro and small firms. The PER targets larger and more complex firms,
      and also individuals.
(183) European Commission (2016). See also the stakeholder consultation (Annex 1).
(184) In the context of the restructuring plans, the Portuguese government agreed with CGD, BPI and BCP that each bank would
      allocate €30 million per year to a fund that would in turn invest in equity of SMEs and mid-cap corporates. Further specific
      lending targets were not defined.
(185) The IMF recorded about €800 million of the PME Crescimento line not tapped in 2012 and another €800 million unused as of
      mid-October 2013. See IMF (2013d)
(186) Global loans to support lending to midcaps and SMEs signed between the EIB and credit institutions operating in Portugal
      totalled €700 million in 2013 alone.




                                                                                                                                            107
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            financing, the Portuguese authorities promoted an efficient use of EU structural funds, since early
            2013. These efforts led to the project of setting up the DFI, with the aim of consolidating all government
            supported financing initiatives. The project was introduced in the conditionality only in early 2014 to be
            completed in the second half of the year, after the programme terminated. The protracted timing might
            have been due to some doubts about the potential usefulness of such an institution and the need of
            ensuring that it would not pose additional financial burdens on the state, it would adhere to safeguards of
            supervision and transparency, and it would not distort competition. (187) While, on the one hand, the DFI's
            late set-up might have reduced the short term potential effects on lending, on the other hand, its
            appropriate set-up should ensure that the effects are maximized and sustained over the medium term. The
            DFI was incorporated as a financial company supervised by the BdP, and tasked to on-lend to SMEs and
            manage financial instruments funded by EU structural funds, while not being allowed to take deposits
            from the public.


            6.3.    OVERALL OUTCOME AND ASSESSMENT

            As a line was not drawn under the needs of the banks, the banking sector still represents a source of
            risk for the state. During the programme, the aggregate gross public capital injection was limited to
            around €8bn or 5% of GDP. (188) €4bn CoCos were already reimbursed by the end of 2014. (189)
            However, after the programme terminated, further public disbursements materialized, following the
            resolution of BES, in August 2014, and Banif, in December 2015. BES resolution required an immediate
            injection of €4.9bn, as share capital of Novo Banco - the bridge bank. This amount came from the newly
            set-up Resolution Fund that borrowed most (about €3.9bn) of it from the state (BSSF). (190) Banif
            resolution required a capital injection of €2.25bn, split between the Resolution Fund (€0.5bn) and the
            state (€1.75bn). (191) As a consequence of these resolutions, the Portuguese banking system has
            undertaken a contingent liability on the resolved banks, and the state has undertaken a contingent liability
            on the banking system, as it provides a backstop to the Resolution Fund. (See Box 6.1) Additional
            contingent liabilities for the state arise from the deposit guarantee scheme and the NGS, from the legacy
            SPVs following the resolution and sale of BPN and from the public ownership of CGD.

            Banking sector's profitability remained negative during the programme, with the aggregate
            improvements in 2015 yet to be confirmed on a sustained basis and for all the main domestic banks.
            During the programme, the negative profitability has been driven mostly by the protracted impairments,
            but also by the low operating profits. Given the banks' cost of capital, downward pressures to the interest
            margin resulted from the limited new business volumes and the legacy "tracker mortgages", in a low rates
            environment; upward support resulted from the carry-trades on sovereign bonds. Eventually, the sector
            turned profitable in the first three quarters of 2015, before going back into negative territory in the last
            quarter of the year. The overall improvements are due to reduced impairment charges and increased gross
            income on average. In turn, the latter has been supported by one-off financial operations, including capital
            gains from debt securities, and income from abroad. Accordingly, the 2015 improvement of the cost-to-
            income ratio is mainly due to the increased income rather than to reduced operating costs. (Table 6.2)
            Going forward, business volumes are unlikely to promptly increase, as the deleveraging of the private
            sector is expected to last for some time, while low nominal interest rates would continue compressing the
            banks' margins. Carry trades would gradually reduce their profitability as sovereign spreads decline. In
            this context, cost reduction should continue: the ratio between population and branches has increased to


            (187) The European Commission approved the set-up of DFI in October 2014. See SA.37824 (2014/N) – Portuguese Development
                  Financial Institution
            (188) This includes the recapitalization of CGD, BPI, BCP, Banif, BPN. Additional costs, amounting to around €1.5bn, resulted from
                  the transfer of BPN troubled assets to the state-owned SPVs but were mostly recorded in 2010.
            (189) As of May 2016, BPI repaid the full €1.5bn amount of CoCos; BCP repaid €2.25bn, out of the total €3.0bn; CGD had to repay
                  the whole €0.9bn CoCos originally received; Banif repaid €0.275bn out of the total €0.4bn, before being put under resolution.
            (190) Shareholders and debt holders of BES are also set to contribute to the resolution's costs.
            (191) Shareholders and debt holders of Banif are also set to contribute to the resolution's costs.




108
                                                                                                                           6. Banking sector policies




slightly above 1,700 but remains among the lowest in Europe. (192) However, the situation varies across
the banks. The main private banks, which implemented deeper restructuring plans, returned to
profitability in 2015. Novo Banco, which is a temporary institution, and CGD have remained loss-making
in 2015 and their cost base is above average.

Table 6.2:
Portuguese banks in a snapshot

                               CET 1             NPL        NPL Coverage        RoE       Impairments- Operat. profits-       Cost-to-
                                                 Ratio         Ratio                        to-Assets    to-Assets            Income
                                  (1)              (1)            (1)             (2)            (2)            (2)              (2)

2015            EU              13.6               5.8           43.8            4.3            0.4             0.8             63.5
                Portugal        11.9              19.1           39.4            0.9            1.0             1.0             60.3
2014            EU              12.5               6.4           43.2            3.0            n.a.            n.a.            63.6
                Portugal        n.a.              17.2           35.5           -17.2           1.9             0.8             66.5
(1) Percentage. Source: EBA (Risk Dashboard), main domestic banking groups. The sample may vary across years.
(2) Percentage. Source: ECB (Statistical Data Warehouse), all banks. The sample may vary across years.


The high level of NPLs has remained a significant problem after the end of the programme,
together with the high sovereign exposure. The NPL increase that occurred during the programme
period has not been followed by a significant decrease. High NPL levels weigh – at different levels – on
all the main Portuguese domestic banks and may reduce their lending capacity, impairing the transmission
of monetary policy. The coverage ratio has gradually improved, but remains lower than the EU average,
thus limiting the room for absorbing losses in case of further asset-quality deterioration. (Table 6.2)
Going forward, it is important that a proper set of incentives is in place to ensure adequate provisioning
and/or write-offs. Moreover, the banks maintained stable holdings of government bonds, mainly
domestic, while significantly reducing their other assets. As a result, banks' holding of sovereign bonds
increased to around 8% of their total assets, during the programme, and did not decline thereafter. (Graph
6.4a) Going forward, this sovereign exposure could become a weakness in case of a sovereign shock and,
to some extent, monetary policy tightening. In general, the Portuguese banks have become more
intertwined with the domestic economy, (193) while remaining exposed to emerging market countries, in
particular Angola.

           Graph 6.4a: Banks' holdings of sovereign                                      Graph 6.4b: Target 2 (liabilities)
                   bonds, % of total assets                                     € Bn
12     %                                                                 80

                                                                         70
10
                                                                         60
 8
                                                                         50

 6                                                                       40

                                                                         30
 4
                                                                         20
 2
                                                                         10
 0                                                                         0
 Jan-08    Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11         Jan-12   Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15      Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12 Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15
                PT      ES               IT          DE       FR
  Source: ECB



The programme contributed to support market confidence towards the Portuguese banking sector,
but the sentiment did not improve after the end of the programme. During the programme, the ability
of the main private banks to raise debt and capital, including to partially repay CoCos, signalled some

(192) Source: ECB (2015b). See also IMF (2016) and DG ECFIN (2016a)
(193) Source: Crosignani, M. et al (2015)




                                                                                                                                                  109
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            confidence in the banking sector's health. In fact, the aggregate sector's resilience improved throughout
            the programme. (194) In light of the progress made in the programme period, including through the
            enhancement of the Portuguese and EA firewalls, the resolution of BES did not trigger immediate
            systemic adverse effects. However, the protracted process of restructuring Banif and resolving BES, (195)
            compounded by the combination of aggregate low profitability and high NPLs, contributed to worsen the
            market sentiment, after the end of the programme: capital and the debt issuance activity did not pick up.
            This has posed further pressure on (risk weighted) assets and constrained the post-programme reduction
            of the Eurosystem financing, which stabilized above 5% of the aggregate banks' liabilities. In line with
            Eurosystem dynamic, Target 2 claims remain historically high, at 35% of GDP. (196) (Graph 6.4b)
            Confirming the banks' sustained return to profitability for the main domestic banks and progressing
            towards the reduction of NPLs would support market confidence. At the same time, negative
            developments could jeopardize this process and other programme's achievements, including the fiscal
            consolidation, in light of the existing contingent risks for the state.




            Lending conditions for households and corporations have been gradually improving since 2012.
            During the programme, bank lending decreased more and for longer than initially projected (Graph 6.5a)
            and access to debt financing remained difficult especially for companies seeking credit for the first time.
            Different studies and surveys explain this dynamic as a consequence of both the worsened credit demand,
            also in light of the worse-than-expected macroeconomic outcome, and the limited credit supply. (197)
            However, already in 2012 and more significantly in 2013, credit flows meant a gradual rebalancing
            towards more productive and tradable sectors, while lending conditions – as reflected in the interest rates
            charged on new loans – started improving, although remaining tighter than in other EA countries. (Graph
            6.5b) The capital reallocation and the improvements of lending conditions continued after the end of the
            programme. Recent studies highlight that lending costs in Portugal are explained by banks' funding costs
            rather than by exogenous factors, such as the sovereign funding costs and the output gap. (DG ECFIN
            (2015a) While this can reflect a proper (re)pricing of the risk profile of the Portuguese companies, which
            tend to be more leveraged than in other countries, it also indicates that the overall adjustment of the
            private sector balance sheet is yet to be completed.



            (194) The ECB 2014 comprehensive assessment covered GGD, BPI and BCP. They all passed the stress test under the baseline
                  scenario, but BCP fell short of the 5.5% CET1 threshold, under the adverse scenario. However, the bank had already raised
                  sufficient capital in 2014 to cover for this gap.
            (195) Novo Banco was assessed separately by the ECB in 2015. It successfully passed the stress test under the baseline scenario, but
                  fell short under the more adverse scenario (CET ratio of 2.43%).
            (196) Recent development in Target 2 balances is also explained by the ECB expanded Asset Purchase Programmes, i.e. the ECB
                  Quantitative Easing tool, and particularly the Public Sector Purchase Programme, started in March 2015.
            (197) Sources: Farinha, L.,Felix, S., (2014); Augusto, F., Félix S. (2014); IMF (2013e); Antunes A., Martinho, P. (2012)




110
                                                                                                                                                                        6. Banking sector policies




Private debt has been declining, but the slow pace means the debt level is still high. As a percentage
of GDP, household debt reduction started before the programme, at the beginning of 2010, while
corporate debt started to decline only after the end of 2012, and to a limited extent. (Graph 6.6a) The ratio
between corporate debt and operating profits also declined, but remains higher than in other EA countries
(Graph 6.6b). Non-financial corporations in a number of different sectors presented high debt, which was
not promptly reduced by either companies' restructuring/insolvency or through growth, given the
recessionary environment. In fact, corporate deleveraging was mainly achieved through negative credit
flows. Going forward, the debt reduction could further accelerate if the reforms of the legal insolvency
and restructuring frameworks give their full effects, (198) and the economy continues rebalancing towards
the tradable sectors allowing a sustainable increase in corporate margins. The initiatives introduced by the
government in the 2013 budget, of limiting the tax deductibility of corporate interest costs to companies
up to specific ceilings, should contribute to discourage the future accumulation of financial leverage. The
main risk to this scenario is represented by an economic slowdown, which - in light of the banks'
relatively weak position in terms of NPL coverage ratio - could turn the feedback between the banks and
the economy into a vicious loop.

               Graph 6.6a: non-consolidated Private Debt                                                               Graph 6.6b: NFC Debt to Surplus, Ratio
 300          % of GDP                                                                                            10

 250
                                                                                                                  8
 200
                                                                                                                  6
 150
                                                                                                                  4
 100

  50                                                                                                              2

   0                                                                                                              0
       07Q1
               07Q3
                       08Q1
                              08Q3
                                     09Q1
                                            09Q3
                                                   10Q1
                                                          10Q3
                                                                 11Q1
                                                                        11Q3
                                                                               12Q1
                                                                                      12Q3
                                                                                             13Q1
                                                                                                    13Q3
                                                                                                           14Q1




                                                                                                                       2007   2008     2009     2010   2011   2012   2013      2014

                      PT HH                 PT NFCs                 EA                Private sector                                 Portugal             Other EA Countries

  Source: Eurostat, OECD



Both the programme design and the programme implementation should have pursued a more
frontloaded adjustment of the banks' balance sheet. The programme design envisaged the combination
of stress tests and asset quality reviews to contribute to the estimation of the banks' capital needs.
However, the stress tests did not foster prompt actions to improve the resilience of all the covered banks,
including under stress scenarios. The asset quality reviews required repeated rounds to ensure adequate
assessments. BdP was responsible for the design and implementation of the bank recapitalisation, but the
programme strategy could have better emphasized the importance of its building blocks and provided
more detailed guidance and pressure on their implementation. The bank supervisory actions should also
have been tighter with regard to provisioning and write-offs, especially when the problems related to the
economic slow-down became more evident. A publicly available analysis, in the programme context,
about the advantages and drawback of different options to tackle NPLs could also have been helpful, to
support the implementation of the most effective policies.

A prompter adjustment of the troubled Banif and BES would have been beneficial. With hindsight, a
more forceful supervisory approach could also have fostered the adjustment of Banif and BES. For




(198) Winter 2015/16 post-programme surveillance and 2016 Country Specific Recommendations called for a more ambitious
      approach to corporate debt workout (IMF (2016), European Commission (2016)). The reforms of the legal frameworks for the
      claims enforcement are helping improving processing speed and private debt recovery (Pompe, S. and Bergthaler, W. (2015))




                                                                                                                                                                                               111
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            instance, the doubts on the viability of Banif could have justified its prompt resolution. (199) More
            stringent stress tests, earlier and more intrusive requests to address governance weaknesses could have
            accelerated the adjustment of BES, although its late resolution was - in the view of some stakeholders -
            partially the result of elements that emerged only gradually, such as "material irregularities" in the
            accounts of the parent company. In turn, a prompter restructuring/resolution of the two banks could have
            reduced the potential costs arising from late actions and supported a sustained return of market confidence
            towards the Portuguese banking system, over the medium-term. It is unlikely that an earlier resolution
            would have caused financial instability, as the resolution framework had been promptly put in place and
            the action would have been limited - at the maximum - to two banks, one of which was relatively small
            and important only in certain regions of the country. (See Box 6.1)

            A more forceful approach towards CGD could also have been warranted. CGD still holds assets
            amounting to more than 20% of the overall banking sector. It has neither reimbursed the CoCos nor
            returned to sustained profitability yet, including because of the high cost base. A deeper streamlining of
            the bank, possibly accompanied by concrete steps towards its full privatization, could have helped reduce
            the contingent risks for the state and foster competition in the banking sector. This strategy would have
            relied on a prompter delinking of CGD from BPN, in line with the initial programme's plan. With
            hindsight, the ensuing immediate financial pressures for the state would have been manageable, in view
            of the sizeable cash buffer accumulated by the state at the end of the programme.

            The financial envelope for the banking sector was sufficient to support a more frontloaded
            adjustment. The post-programme needs, arisen from the resolution of BES and Banif and covered by the
            state, were close to the BSSF funds that were left unused by the end of the programme. Consequently, an
            earlier resolution of the two banks could have relied on the existing BSSF funds, even if the costs of an
            early resolution would have been as high as they eventually turned out be – which is unlikely. Additional
            potential needs, including from other banks as a result of the more frontloaded adjustment, could have
            been covered through earlier and wider losses for banks' shareholders and junior debtholders. However, in
            the view of some stakeholders, additional contingent buffers could have further strengthened financial
            stability and market confidence, especially given the absence of well-developed EA/EU risk-sharing
            tools. (200)

            More and better coordinated initiatives aiming at fostering extra-banking financing – especially
            equity – to viable business and reducing private sector debt could have also been warranted. To
            maximize the short-term effectiveness, the Portuguese authorities targeted mainly initiatives to foster
            lending through the banking channel. In this context, an earlier enhancement of the credit mediation
            functions could have improved access to lending to SMEs. More progress in the development of the
            capital markets would hardly have brought immediate significant effects on credit flow, also in view of
            the structurally depressed credit demand, but it could have contributed to pave the way for a sustained
            recovery in the medium term, in particular by promoting proper risk assessment and credit allocation, and
            addressing the debt-to-equity corporate bias, which was already unfolding its negative effects. Better
            coordination at the level of both the Portuguese authorities and the EU authorities, together with the set-
            up of ad hoc task forces, could have been arguably helpful, in particular with regard to the design of
            initiatives aiming at facilitating SMEs' raising of long-term funding, including through EU financing to
            address market failures; considering the set-up of markets/institutions to handle distressed debts;
            optimizing the corporates' insolvency process, including with regard to the role of tax claims and potential
            mechanisms to facilitate debt-to-equity swaps in the firms' restructuring.


            (199) More evidence on the process that led to the recapitalisation and resolution of Banif is expected with the finalisation of the
                  inquiry of the Committee that has been established within the Portuguese Parliament (Resolução da Assembleia da República
                  n.º 16/2016, publicada no Diário da República, 1.ª Série, n.º 19, de 28 de janeiro de 2016)
             200
            ( ) EU bail-in legislation came only in mid-2014 with full application in 2016; the mutualisation of the national "Resolution Funds"
                  will occur gradually, over a transition period terminating in 2024. Direct bank recapitalization by the ESM was discussed in
                  June 2012 but formally introduced only in late 2014. The ESM has not been provided with the possibility to extend guarantees.




112
7.             SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS


7.1.     BACKGROUND AND PROGRAMME DESIGN

Portugal has historically had high income inequality. Portugal has been historically characterised by a
higher at-risk-of-poverty rate than the EU (in 2011, PT: 18%, EU: 16,8%). But indicators of relative
poverty and poverty or social exclusion were relatively stable and even on a slight downward trend until
2010 (see Graph 7.1a). Furthermore, the at-risk-of-poverty rate that anchors the poverty line at a fixed
point in time (2005) fell from 19,2% in 2006 to 14,1% in 2010 (201). An absolute measure of poverty such
as the severe material deprivation rate (202) was declining up to 2011, indicating resistance of (relative and
absolute) income-related poverty measures to the first period of the crisis (Graph 7.1d). Portugal also has
one of the most unequal income distributions in Europe (203), although from 2005 to 2010 inequality was
on a downward path, with an average decline of the Gini coefficient of almost 1 percentage point per
year. (Graph 7.1b)

The programme had room to improve the design of social protection expenditure to promote
effectiveness and equity. The developments up to 2011 demonstrated the redistributive power of
automatic stabilisers, such as unemployment benefits, and the redistributive impact of reforms aimed at
protecting the most vulnerable social groups. In 2010, for example, indexation was frozen for all except
the lowest pensions. Social protection spending as a share of GDP was on an upward trend until 2010,
though it remained at a level below the EU-average (Graph 7.1c). On the back of population ageing, the
main driver underlying this trend was old-age pension expenditure. Non-pension social spending
accounted for a smaller and rather stable share of the total social spending and included different
contributory (e.g. unemployment benefits) and non-contributory (e.g. minimum guaranteed income)
benefits. There was some room to fine-tune social benefits to promote effectiveness and equity as a large
number of programmes were fragmented, duplicated or overlapping, and some programmes were poorly
targeted and disproportionately directed at the better off (e.g. housing allowances) (204). Also, means-
testing applied to less than a third of non-retirement benefits in 2012 and represented only 10% of the
social protection in value (205).




(201) The at-risk-of-poverty rate is sensitive to changes of the poverty threshold which may shift due to changes in median incomes
      (e.g. real earnings of employees dropping due to increasing unemployment). The "anchored poverty line" isolates this effect, by
      fixing the real value of the poverty line at a fixed moment in time.
(202) The material deprivation rate expresses the inability to afford some items considered by most people to be desirable or even
      necessary to lead an adequate life. It measures the percentage of the population that cannot afford at least three of the following
      nine items: to pay their rent, mortgage or utility bills; to keep their home adequately warm; to face unexpected expenses; to eat
      meat or proteins regularly; to go on holiday; a television set; a washing machine; a car; a telephone.
 203
( ) In 2011, Gini coefficient in PT: 0,342, EU-27:0.307; income quintile share S80/S20 ratio in PT: 5.6 in 2010; EU-27: 4.9.
(204) IMF (2013a).
(205) Source: EC staff calculations based on ESPROSS.




                                                                                                                                            113
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                Graph 7.1a: Developments in poverty and social                                                                 Graph 7.1b: Inequality indicators, 2005-2014, PT and EU-27
                                             exclusion, 2006-2014
               32                                                                                                      65                                                                                                                     7
               30
                                                                                                                       60
               28                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7
                                                                                                                       55
               26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
               24                                                                                                      50
               22                                                                                                      45                                                                                                                     6
               20                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
               18
                                                                                                                       35
               16                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                       30
               14
               12                                                                                                      25                                                                                                                     4
                         2006      2007      2008       2009     2010       2011    2012      2013     2014                    2005       2006          2007      2008        2009   2010        2011        2012        2013        2014
                              At-risk-of-poverty rate anchored at a fixed moment in time (2005), PT                             Gini coef disposable income, EU-27 (lhs)                    Gini coef disposable income, PT (lhs)
                              At-risk-of-poverty rate, PT                                                                       Gini coef before social transfers, EU-27 (lhs)              Gini coef before social transfers, PT (lhs)
                              At-risk-of-poverty rate, EU-27                                                                    Income quintile share ratio (S80/S20), EU-27 (rhs)          Income quintile share ratio (S80/S20), PT (rhs)
                              People at risk of poverty or social exclusion, PT
                                                                                                                      Source: Eurostat, EU-SILC. [EU-27 (instead of EU-28) is used for availability of a longer data series]
                              Relative median at risk of poverty gap, PT
               Source: Eurostat
                                            Graph 7.1c: Social protection spending in Portugal                                                     13           Graph 7.1d: Severere material deprivation, 2006-
                        30%                                                                                                          5,000
                                                                                                                                                                                     2015
                        25%
                                                                                                                                                   11
                        20%                                                                                                          4,500
                % GDP




                        15%                                                                                                                         9
                        10%                                                                                                          4,000

                         5%                                                                                                                         7

                         0%                                                                                                          3,500
                                    2006         2007         2008         2009      2010         2011        2012       2013                       5
                        Sickness/health care (lhs)                                         Disability (lhs)                                                2006      2007     2008   2009     2010      2011      2012      2013      2014
                        Old-age (lhs)                                                      Survivors (lhs)
                        Family/Children (lhs)                                              Unemployment (lhs)
                        Housing Function (lhs)                                             Social Exclusion (lhs)                                                     EU-27                   EA-19                       Portugal
                        All functions-PT (lhs)                                             All functions-EU27 (lhs)
                        Social protection benefits pc, 2005 constant prices (rhs)
              Source: ESPROSS                                                                                                                        Source: Eurostat



            Mitigating the negative social impacts of the adjustment was part of the programme aims, but no
            explicit social goals or specific requirements on monitoring social developments were set. An
            important aim of the programme was to mitigate the negative social impacts and in particular, to protect
            the weakest, while addressing fiscal, banking and structural imbalances at the same time. Tax increases
            were to be designed in a progressive way, minimum wages and lowest pensions were to remain
            untouched and social benefits extended to many that were unduly excluded (206). However, the
            programme did not include a requirement to assess the distributional effects of the measures (in particular
            key fiscal measures with potentially high social impact) and conditionality did not foresee a systematic
            monitoring or reporting of social developments.

            Many programme measures took equity and social considerations into account. The following
            presents a synthetic review of measures undertaken under several key policy areas of the programme that
            had the potential to directly affect household incomes and other social outcomes. The objective is not to
            evaluate the impact of the various measures on the social situation in the country, but to assess to what
            extent the programme design took account of social concerns.

            Health care reforms: (i) Income thresholds for co-payment exemption for NHS services were increased
            and co-payment levels set so as to protect individuals from excessive health expenditures. As a result
            more than 50% of the population is exempted from co-payments; (ii) Regarding access to care, several
            measures in the primary care area aimed at increasing the number of people covered by their own family
            doctor; (iii) The reduction of barriers to entry in the generics market allowed lower prices for medicines,
            savings for patients and improved access to medicines.

            Labour market reforms: (i) The reform of the unemployment benefits aimed at balancing incentives to
            work with adequate social protection during unemployment spells. Hence, the programme reduced the
            duration of unemployment benefits (for new contracts) and reduced net replacement rates after six months


            (206) DG ECFIN (2011a).




114
                                                                                                                     7. Social developments




of unemployment. At the same time, it reduced the necessary contributory period to access
unemployment insurance and extended eligibility to some categories of workers; (ii) Measures to increase
flexibility and wage moderation were designed so as to reduce the duality of the labour market, thereby
contributing to a more shared burden of the adjustment; (iii) There was a genuine effort to increase and
improve Active Labour Market Policies to boost the employability of the most vulnerable workers. EU
structural funds participated to this objective and allowed financing of the measures in times of budget
constraints.

Fiscal measures: (i) Wage and pension cutbacks were implemented in a progressive way (207); (ii)
Indexation mechanism of pensions were suspended since 2011 except for the minimum pensions, in order
to protect the purchasing power of those with lowest pensions; (iii) Many tax measures were designed so
as to ensure that taxpayers with higher capacity to pay would bear a higher share of the burden: e.g. on
the personal income tax, a 3.5% surcharge on income above the minimum wage, further solidarity
surcharges on top-incomes and higher rates on capital income were introduced; tax exemptions were
reduced, including for private education and health expenditures, which are overwhelmingly consumed
by better-off households; VAT reforms that moved items consumed more by wealthier households to
higher rates have been progressive (208).

Housing market reform: the changes to the urban rental law providing for more flexibility in the duration
of contracts and evolution of rents ensured higher protection to tenants over 65 years and people with
disability. Safeguards for low incomes were implemented in the reforms of the recurrent property tax. A
stamp duty on high-value properties was introduced.

Some other measures (or lack thereof) failed to ensure progressivity in the burden-sharing of the
adjustment or in protecting the lowest income groups. Some measures were repeatedly negotiated and
even announced but never implemented by the government, like a cap on accumulated social benefits,
including those provided by local governments. Furthermore, many of the product market reforms failed
to reduce decisively unwarranted rents and sector protection (in particular in the energy sector, ports and
regulated professions). This leads to the view (209) that not all segments of the society participated in the
burden sharing of the needed adjustment.

Many social benefits were reformed, often tightening eligibility conditions. The MoU included
provisions around cutting and reforming welfare benefits, mainly setting quantitative saving targets and
general principles and letting the authorities design the way to achieve them. Various social programmes
were revised, in particular covering the contingencies of sickness, maternity, paternity and death; the
guaranteed minimum income scheme (RSI) and its means-testing conditions was also changed. The
reforms often aimed at tightening eligibility conditions and improving means-testing. A transitional
Emergency Food Programme was put in place in 2012 to provide support for those who were not able to
obtain two daily meals for themselves or for their families.

Social protection spending grew during the programme years as a percentage of GDP, but it was
overall reduced if compared to a scenario of no changes in legislation. Driven by old-age pensions,
expenditure on social protection grew during the programme years in line with the EU-average trend.
However, between 2011 and 2014, most social benefits were reduced compared to a "no policy change
scenario" (210). This was not the case of unemployment benefits, which increased under the programme
compared to a scenario of no changes in legislation. The number of beneficiaries fell for most benefits,

(207) During 2011-2013 the public sector wage cuts ranged from 3.5% to 10% for monthly salaries above EUR 1500. In 2014 the
      cuts ranged from 2.5% to 12% for monthly salaries above EUR 600. The design of the extraordinary solidarity contribution
      from pensions (CES) changed several times over the programme but always ensuring the protection of lower pensions. In 2014
      the progressive contribution rates started applying from EUR 1000/month and range from 3.5% to 50%.
(208) OECD (2014c).
(209) Stakeholder consultation.
(210) Calculations from Instituto da Segurança Social, Portugal. "Impact Analysis of New Measures"




                                                                                                                                        115
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            while it increased for pensions and unemployment benefits. The average value of most benefits was also
            reduced. Reforming some welfare benefits delivered some limited savings, but did not improve
            substantially the efficiency and targeting of the social safety net (211). In light of the increasing social
            needs arising from the crisis and the relatively low level of social spending compared to EU peers, the
            reforms of these benefits should have focused on improving targeting to the most in need to achieve
            efficiency and equity gains, and not on delivering spending savings.


            7.2.     DEVELOPMENTS IN SOCIAL OUTCOMES

            The programme enabled Portugal to avoid a dramatic and immediate adjustment in the economic
            and social situation. In the absence of a programme, the Portuguese sovereign would have been unable
            to meet its obligations, leading to an immediate and dramatic adjustment with widespread economic and
            social consequences. While some of the social outcomes described below in this section (which focuses
            on the employment status, material poverty, the income distribution and access to public goods) may be
            related to the implementation of the programme, as highlighted in the analysis, it should be noted that
            developments are not always necessarily the result of programme policies. In particular, there is no
            account of a counterfactual scenario featuring what would have been the impact of the economic crisis on
            the social situation of the Portuguese population that can be used as a benchmark to measure the
            additional effect from the adoption of the MoU measures. Hence the assessment is necessarily somewhat
            speculative.




            (211) Stakeholder consultation.




116
                                                                                                 7. Social developments




Over 2010-2013, a period that included a recession in the euro area, there was a fast increase in
total unemployment, which was one of the main drivers of the increasing incidence of poverty. In
2013, the unemployment rate peaked at 16.4% overall and 38.1% for the youth. The more pronounced
GDP contraction in the first years of the programme compared to the previous period was the main culprit
of this job destruction. Long-term unemployment reached 60% of total unemployment in 2014 (from 44%
of the total in 2009). Unemployment, especially long term unemployment, was one of the main reasons
for raising inequality and social exclusion.

Emigration has been on the rise since 2010, easing pressure on unemployment developments.
Between 2011 and 2013, 150,000 persons left Portugal on a long-term basis (i.e. for a period of at least 12
months). Total emigrants (long and short duration) amounted to 128,000 in 2013 (212), 1/3 of them
women. The international migration balance turned negative in 2011. While there are not available
official studies on the underlying reasons and components of these trends, a plausible assumption is that
emigration has been driven by the search of better employment opportunities abroad. This is a hidden cost
of the crisis that does not show up in some key social indicators like the unemployment rate or domestic
poverty.

Portugal has experienced an increase in poverty and social exclusion in the last years. The
percentage of people at risk of poverty has been increasing since 2012, reaching 19.5% in 2014 (the 7th
highest in the EU, EU-average: 17,2%). A quarter of children lived below the poverty line in 2014 (20%
at EU level). Likewise, risk of poverty or social exclusion is higher than in the EU (27,5% of the

(212) OECD (2015b)




                                                                                                                    117
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            population in Portugal versus 24,5% in the EU, 2014), though it has remained relatively stable in recent
            years. A closer look at other poverty indicators gives a better picture of recent developments:

            The poverty intensity amongst the poor has become higher, as measured by the poverty gap (213)
            which has been rising since 2010. A determinant of this result is the reduced effectiveness of the
            guaranteed minimum income scheme to reduce poverty, following the reforms introduced during the
            programme (214). Between 2011 and 2014, the number of beneficiaries was reduced by 30% and the
            monthly benefits per household by 11% (215). The changes hardly affected the level of relative poverty,
            since most recipients were already below the poverty line, but have made the poor poorer (216).

            Some categories of the population suffered more than others from the adjustment. (see Graph 7.2b)
            The unemployed are those with the highest incidence of poverty: 40,6% of the unemployed lived at risk
            of poverty in 2014, on a rising trend since 2010; 10,7% of the working population was also at risk of
            poverty in 2014, explained by the significant number of low-paid workers; retirees by contrast were more
            protected from social hardship and saw their poverty levels decline as median incomes fell and low
            pensions were relatively well protected.

            The risk of poverty using an "anchored poverty line" has increased much more than the relative at-
            risk-of-poverty. With a 2005-anchored poverty line, the at-risk-of-poverty has moved up from 14.1% in
            2010 to 20.4% in 2014 (see Graph 7.1a). This is explained by the various effects of the economic crisis on
            household incomes (i.e. rising unemployment, decrease in real earnings of employees, etc).

            According to available simulations, fiscal consolidation measures in the period from 2009 to 2012
            had an overall progressive impact and in general, Portugal has prevented an increase in inequality
            (measured by the Gini coefficient) in recent years. The EUROMOD model has been used to simulate
            the distributional effects of fiscal consolidation measures on households' disposable incomes (217). For the
            period analysed (2009-2012, i.e. including pre-programme measures), the simulations include changes in
            direct taxes and contributions, VAT, social benefits, tax credits and public sector pay (including the
            suspension of the 13th and 14th months of pay in 2012). The results show that the burden of fiscal
            consolidation measures during this period fell more heavily on the richest and to a lesser extent on the
            poorest, than it does on those with middle incomes (inverted U-shape pattern). (Graph 7.3) Overall, the
            scale of the reductions in household income was large: around 5.5% drops for the poorest, 4% fall for
            middle income groups and up to 9% fall for the richest. The overall progressive impact was due to the
            emphasis put by the programme on progressive cuts in public wages and pensions, which offset the
            regressive cuts in social transfers that negatively affected households in the bottom decile. Household
            data reflecting changes after 2012 are not available, but it is likely that measures such as the 2013
            personal income tax reform or reinforcement of the fight against tax fraud have made the tax system more
            progressive. Market income inequality has been growing since 2011 (as measured by the Gini coefficient
            before social transfers); however social transfers muted the trend and have prevented an increase in
            inequality (as measured by the Gini coefficient of disposable income, see Graph 7.1b).




            (213) Difference between the at-risk-of-poverty threshold (set at 60 % of the national median equivalised disposable income after
                  social transfers) and the median equivalised disposable income of persons below the same threshold, expressed as a percentage
                  of the at-risk-of-poverty threshold.
            (214) In January 2016 legislation was passed increasing the reference value and changing the equivalence scale of the minimum
                  income scheme back to the 2012 level so as to widen its coverage.
            (215) Stakeholder consultation.
            (216) Arnold, J., Farinha Rodrigues, C. (2015).
            (217) Avram, S. et al (2013)




118
                                                                                                                                         7. Social developments




                 Graph 7.3: Simulation of impact of 2009-2012 fiscal consolidation measures (% of household disposable income,
                                                               by income deciles)
       0
      -1
      -2
      -3
      -4
      -5
      -6
      -7
      -8
      -9
     - 10
            Bottom decile    2            3             4            5            6            7            8            9        Top decile
  Source: OECD, from The distributional effects of fiscal consolidation in nine EU countries - Institute for Social and Economic Research (ISER).
  EUROMOD Working Paper Series EM2/13



As concerns access to public goods, certain indicators (218) point to an improvement of the situation
in the case of education and access to health care, while affordability of housing deteriorated since
2010. The number of early school leavers (219) is on a downward trend since 2008 due both to policy
efforts and to the reduction in job opportunities for young people (Graph 7.5a). Yet, Portugal still has the
fifth highest rate (13,7% in 2015) of early school dropout in the EU-27. Regarding access to health care,
amongst the lowest income group, self-reported unmet needs for medical examination because of
affordability problems or waiting list being too long was going down until 2011 and increased thereafter,
but stayed at levels similar to pre-programme period (Graph 7.4a). This indicator remains however based
on a subjective assessment and all the related limitations. Recent pharmaceutical policies have made on
average medicines less expensive for patients (Graph 7.4b). At the same time, Portuguese authorities' data
(220) show that the number of drug packages have not decreased, ensuring that the access to medicines
was not at risk. Overall, the reform of co-payment in 2011 seems to have achieved its objective of a more
equitable financing, and the improvements in the primary care register have increased access for some
excluded population. Some negative outcomes seem to be the lengthening of waiting lists for chirurgical
interventions and increased unmet needs on access to health services (221). Developments in housing
affordability show that the housing cost overburden rate (222) increased by 5 pp between 2010 and 2014
and even more for people at-risk-of-poverty, revealing a serious vulnerability of the population (Graph
7.5b). It is thus particularly welcome that housing market reforms within the programme endeavoured to
take the situation of the most vulnerable into consideration, although no real assessment can be done thus
far.




(218) It should be noted that indicators presented here have limitations and do not provide a full proper assessment of the access to
      public goods.
(219) Percentage of the population aged 18-24 with at most lower secondary education and who were not in further education or
      training during the last four weeks preceding the survey.
(220) Stakeholder consultation.
 221
( ) Stakeholder consultation.
(222) Percentage of the population living in a household where the total housing costs (net of housing allowances) represent more
      than 40% of the total disposable household income (net of housing allowances).




                                                                                                                                                            119
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                                                                                                  Graph 7.4b: Average price of medicines in NHS
                       Graph 7.4a: Access to health care - Unmet needs, PT                                                         market, PT
              8                                                                                        18
              7
                                                                                                       15
              6
              5                                                                                        12

              4                                                                                         9
              3
                                                                                                        6
              2
              1                                                                                         3

              0
                                                                                                        0
                      2008        2009           2010          2011          2012           2013
                                                                                                              2011         2012           2013        2014        Jan-Nov
                        Self-reported unmet needs for medical examination for the 1st quintile of                                                                   2015
                        income - in reason of too expensive (lhs)
                        Self-reported unmet needs for medical examination for the 1st quintile of               Generics          Branded medicines      Average retail price
                        income - in reason of too expensive, too far to travel of waiting list (lhs)
              Source: Eurostat                                                                          Source: INFARMED




                        Graph 7.5a: Access to education and trainig - early                                   Graph 7.5b: Access to housing - cost overburden rate,
              40
                                           leavers , PT                                                10                              PT

              35                                                                                        9
              30
                                                                                                        8
              25

              20                                                                                        7

              15                                                                                        6
              10
                                                                                                        5
                  5

                  0                                                                                     4
                      2008       2009     2010      2011     2012      2013                2014             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                   Early leavers from education and training                                                  Housing cost overburden rate
              Source: Eurostat                                                                          Source: Eurostat




            7.3.       OVERALL ASSESSMENT

            Social and distributional considerations were rightly taken into account when designing many of
            the programme measures. The programme contributed somewhat to rebalance the share of the burden of
            the adjustment by stressing the need for stronger progressive effects and protecting the worse off. Hence,
            progressive elements in tax reforms (eg personal income tax surcharges on higher incomes) or in
            expenditure cuts (public sector wages and pensions progressive cuts) foreseen in the MoU reflected the
            programme aim of mitigating the social impact of the adjustment and protecting the weakest. The
            redesign of some social protection benefits like the unemployment benefits has been beneficial, insofar as
            it expanded coverage, particularly benefiting the young and those with a short tenure in work. However,
            other social benefits' reforms – such as the reform of the minimum income guaranteed scheme – were
            regressive and could have been avoided or limited in scope, as they mostly implied a sizeable loss of
            income for the lowest decile. As income inequality was already not negligible and the at-risk-of-poverty
            rate was rather high, there was not much room for adjustment to take place in that type of benefits without
            causing a further deterioration in social outcomes.

            The MoU rightly addressed the social concerns through many of the policy areas covered by the
            programme. The programme used many different sectoral policies to achieve social objectives and/or
            mitigate the social impact of the adjustment: eg through housing, taxation, pension reforms, public sector,
            labour market and product market reforms. The fact that measures in many of these areas reflected social



120
                                                                                               7. Social developments




concerns indicate that the issue of a fair burden of the adjustment was rated as important by the
authorities and programme partners.

Efficiency of the social safety net could have been further strengthened. The historically very high
poverty and income inequality levels of Portugal indicated that there was scope for clear improvement of
the social protection system. The programme could have made more progress in ensuring that public
money is spent more efficiently and that the social benefits provide correct incentives. The driver of
reforms in social benefits was mainly budgetary savings, although expenditure on social protection was
below the EU-average and should not have been the focus of budget savings. Little was achieved in terms
of reducing duplications, overlaps and capping of these benefits and improving means-testing.

Monitoring and systematic reporting of social outcomes was not set out as a requirement. Given the
importance of fair burden sharing in maintaining public support for the programme, distributional issues
could have been more clearly, explicitly and systematically addressed in programme reviews and reports.
Setting hard targets in this area may be difficult. But more emphasis on monitoring and reporting on the
social dimension would have been warranted (programme documents show no reference to the
expressions "poverty" and "inequality"). There is a public perception that the outcome of the programme
was socially unbalanced. Since the monitoring and reporting aspects were largely overlooked, there is
insufficient evidence to corroborate or refute this perception.




                                                                                                                  121
8.                   MAIN MACROECONOMIC OUTCOMES AND
                     REMAINING CHALLENGES
The EU/IMF support programme achieved its objective of Portugal regaining market access but
the macroeconomic performance of the Portuguese economy is still far from buoyant. A key
objective of the programme was to address the structural weaknesses that were holding back the economy
before the crisis. This section examines the extent to which the programme has achieved to restore sound
and sustainable fundamentals. It finds that there are signs of structural improvements taking place and
that some of these are due to the implemented reforms. But economic performance has still to strengthen
and important reforms are still pending. Whether the observed improvements will be sustained in the
future or not will depend on whether the reform agenda is pursued. (223)

Table 8.1:
Comparison of macroeconomic projections at the start of the programme with outturns and forecasts (y-o-y change if not otherwise indicated)
                                                                         2010*           2011            2012            2013    2014          2015        2016   2017
GDP at market prices (volume)                                  (1)         1.9            -1.8            -4.0           -1.1     0.9           1.5        1.5    1.7
                                                               (2)         1.3            -2.2            -1.8            1.2     2.5           2.2
Final domestic demand (volume)                                 (1)         1.0            -5.4            -7.0           -2.0     2.2           2.4        1.5    1.9
                                                               (2)         0.8            -5.7            -4.6           -0.3     1.4           1.0
Exports of goods and services (volume)                         (1)         9.5            7.0             3.4             7.0     3.9           5.2        4.1    5.1
                                                               (2)         8.7            6.2             5.9             6.5     6.5           6.5
Imports of goods and services (volume)                         (1)         7.8            -5.8            -6.3            4.7     7.2           7.4        4.3    5.6
                                                               (2)         5.2            -5.3            -2.8            2.1     3.7           3.6
Current account balance (% of GDP)                             (1)        -10.3           -5.5            -2.0            0.7     0.0           -0.1       0.3    0.5
                                                               (2)        -9.8            -7.5            -5.2           -3.9    -3.1           -2.2
HICP                                                           (1)         1.4            3.6             2.8             0.4    -0.2           0.5        0.7    1.2
                                                               (2)         1.5            3.4             2.0             1.4     1.5           1.5
Unit labour costs                                              (1)        -1.2            -2.0            -3.2            1.8    -0.9           -0.6       1.0    0.3
                                                               (2)         0.3            0.7             0.4            -0.4    -0.2           0.0
Labour productivity                                            (1)         3.4            0.1             0.1             1.8    -0.5           0.1        0.6    1.1
                                                               (2)         2.8            -1.4            -0.9            1.0     1.9           1.4
Compensation of employees per head                             (1)         2.1            -1.8            -3.1            3.6    -1.4           -0.6       1.6    1.4
                                                               (2)         1.5            -0.3            0.1             0.8     1.3           1.0
Total employment                                               (1)        -1.4            -1.9            -4.1           -2.9     1.4           1.4        0.9    0.7
                                                               (2)        -1.5            -1.5            -0.9            0.5     1.1           1.3
Unemployment rate (%)                                          (1)        12.0            12.9           15.8            16.4    14.1           12.6       11.6   10.7
                                                               (2)        10.9            12.2           12.9            12.4    11.6           10.6
Notes: * Historical year when the Economic Adjustment Programme started, differences are due to backward historical revisions.
(1) Actual data and Commission Spring forecast 2016 for the years 2016 and 2017.
(2) Commission projections at the start of the Economic Adjustment Programme.
Sources: (1) European Commission Spring forecast 2016; (2) DG ECFIN (2011), "The Economic Adjustment Programme for Portugal ", Occasional Papers 79/2011




8.1.        A SLOW RECOVERY

The initial programme projections in 2011 proved to be excessively optimistic. In the context of a
worse than expected recessionary environment in the EU, growth resumed later than foreseen and
only after a larger-than-expected contraction. Although the economy proved more resilient than
expected in the first part of the programme, the recession that followed was considerably stronger and
more prolonged than expected (Table 8.1 and Graph 8.1a). Until 2013 GDP fell 6.7% and began to
recover in 2014, a year later than forecast. Similarly, unemployment, which was initially expected to peak
at 12.9% in 2012, continued to climb, hitting 16.4% in 2013 (Graph 8.1b).



(223) Portugal is subject to Post Programme Surveillance (PPS), which consists in a broad monitoring of the economic, fiscal and
      financial conditions with a view to assessing the repayment capacity. While there is no policy conditionality under PPS, the
      Council can issue recommendations for corrective actions if necessary and where appropriate. Furthermore, as any other
      Member State, Portugal is subject the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure (MIP) surveillance mechanism and is part of the
      European Semester.




                                                                                                                                                                         123
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            The Portuguese economy finally began to recover over the course of 2013 but growth remained
            close to the euro area average and a catching-up in terms of GDP levels has yet to start. Growth
            turned positive for the first time in late 2013, following eleven consecutive quarters of recession, though
            the first positive annual record was only in 2014. Growth continued in 2015 at the modest rate of 1.5% of
            real GDP. So far it is still difficult to determine whether the resumption is cyclical or the effect of growth-
            enhancing structural reforms. However, with growth barely at the euro area average, the rebound and
            catching-up that was expected is not taking place and GDP still remains below its 2010 peak (Table 8.1
            and Graph 8.1a).

                                                 Graph 8.1a: Real GDP                                      Graph 8.1b: Unemployment

                                  106                                                          18
                                  104                                                          16
                                  102                                                          14
                                  100
                Index, 2008=100




                                                                                               12
                                  98                                              Percentage
                                                                                               10
                                  96
                                                                                                8
                                  94
                                                                                                6
                                  92
                                  90                                                            4
                                  88                                                            2
                                  86                                                            0
                                        05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                      05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

                                           Projections in 2011      PT   EA                            Projections in 2011     PT     EA

              Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast                       Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast


            Exports helped moderate the contraction in income but the recovery only began once domestic
            consumption and investment resumed. The resilience of exports partly offset the effect of the
            contraction of internal demand during the second slump. Domestic demand experienced one the strongest
            contractions during the great recession with consumption dropping 10% from its peak. Imports collapsed
            by 12% and investment lost 30 additional pps. bottoming out at 60% of pre-crisis levels. The economy
            only began to recover when confidence returned allowing consumption and investment to rebound in
            2014 (Graphs 8.2, 8.3a and 8.3b). Short term indicators point to some moderation of economic activity by
            mid-2016 but, as noted above, growth is now expected to remain at the euro area average until the end of
            2017. Given the depth of the contraction, growth could have been faster. A possible reason for the
            relatively poor performance, at least partially, is the deleveraging pressures still weighing on the
            corporate sector.

            The recovery coincided with a slump in HICP inflation triggering fears of deflation and increasing
            the real value of debt. In 2013, HICP inflation dropped abruptly and went negative in 2014 (Table 8.1).
            More recently, the demand-driven recovery, several tax-increasing measures, and the weakening of the
            euro have exerted an upward pressure on consumer prices. HICP inflation is still subdued but is expected
            to grow 0.7% in 2016 and 1.2% in 2017 (Table 8.1). The behaviour of the GDP deflator, as expected, was
            more aligned with the income cycle: depressed during the 2011-2013 recession, it has recovered
            vigorously and is currently around the euro area average of 2%.




124
                                                                                                                      8. Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges




                                                                Graph 8.2: Decomposition of short-term growth

                                               0.08
                                               0.06
                                               0.04
                                               0.02
                                                    0
                                      %, pps




                                               -0.02
                                               -0.04
                                               -0.06
                                               -0.08
                                                -0.1
                                                        00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                                          Consumption         Investment                             Inventories
                                                          Exports             Imports (-)                            GDP

                                                Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast



                                 Graph 8.3a: Consumption                                                                   Graph 8.3b: Gross capital formation

                     110                                                                                       110

                     100                                                                                       100
                                                                                             Index, 2008=100
   Index, 2008=100




                      90                                                                                        90

                      80                                                                                        80

                      70                                                                                        70

                      60                                                                                        60

                      50                                                                                        50
                           05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                                                    05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

                                               EA          PT                                                                            EA         PT

 Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast                                               Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast


After the sharp 2010-14 contraction, investment is growing but remains low and net capital
formation remains negative. In part because of the sharp contraction in 2010-2013, real investment
growth has been above the euro area average and is projected to grow faster until 2017 (Graphs 8.2 and
8.3b). The recovery in investment is led by increases in non-residential investment, transport equipment,
and machines. Despite the recovery, the investment rate remains below the euro area average because of
its low level already before the crisis: the investment rate still stands at 16% of GDP compared to 25% in
the euro area. For this reason, net capital formation has been negative since 2012 and is expected to
remain slightly negative in the near future. (224)

Before the crisis, investment was not very productive but structural reforms and new FDI may help
improving the situation. Past current account deficits mainly fuelled spending on private consumption
and investment in non-residential construction. Investment in machinery and transport equipment were at
levels of peer countries but returns were disappointing as reflected in the low aggregate growth. Most of
this investment was in the retail and wholesale trade and real estate sectors. But productivity in these
sectors remained stagnant. This may explain the low aggregate returns on investment. Future returns may
improve with the revival of FDI. During and after the programme, domestic investment has been
complemented by a significant increase in FDI sparked by privatizations and improvements in the ease of



(224) For gross capital formation, see the European Economic Forecast Spring 2016, and Projections for the Portuguese economy:
      2016-2018, Banco de Portugal. For net capital formation, see AMECO database, Commission services.




                                                                                                                                                                           125
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            doing business promoted by the programme. FDI should bring in new technologies and business practices
            to the economy, sustaining the recovery and eventually improving output growth.

            Cuts to public investment have exceeded plans but the possible negative impact on growth may be
            mitigated by the high level of public investment in the years preceding the crisis. During the period
            2011-2014, public investment as a share of GDP more than halved. Since 2012, it has been below the
            euro area average. This was not envisaged by the programme. Given the extended perimeter of the state in
            Portugal, a significant portion of public investments related to SOEs. Hence, part of this drop in public
            investment was due to consolidation within the SOE sector. On the one hand it can be argued that cutting
            investment programmes may have been growth-detrimental, in particular given that Portugal is lagging
            behind in terms of productivity and competitiveness. On the other hand, strong public investment before
            the crisis has helped build a stock of infrastructures. Indeed, between 1995 and 2005 public investment in
            Portugal was on average at 5% of GDP, 2 pps. higher than the euro area. In addition, during the same
            period, a number of important infrastructure projects have been implemented through PPP agreements
            and, as such, were not recorded as public investment.

                                                  Graph 8.4a: Exports                                                Graph 8.4b: Imports

                                  140                                                                140
                                  130                                                                130
                                  120                                                                120
                Index, 2008=100




                                                                                   Index, 2008=100




                                  110                                                                110
                                  100                                                                100
                                  90                                                                 90
                                  80                                                                 80
                                  70                                                                 70
                                  60                                                                 60
                                  50                                                                 50
                                        05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                             05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

                                           Projections in 2011          PT   EA                               Projections in 2011      PT   EA

              Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast                        Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast


            Exports grew slightly faster than the euro area average during the programme and continue to
            grow at a rapid pace. The resilience of exports contributed to the external rebalancing of the Portuguese
            economy during the programme (Graph 8.4a). The external sector supported national income despite its
            relatively small size. (225) The contraction of GDP combined with the stability of exports increased the
            size of exports over GDP but arithmetically. It is too early to say that a structural change has taken place
            and that the Portuguese economy is going to be more open. After the programme exports seem to have
            grown consistently faster than GDP, pointing to the possibility of an ongoing permanent change in the
            relative size of the external sector and a more open economy.


            8.2.                   REBALANCING

            Programme conditionality explicitly targeted internal and external rebalancing. The vulnerability of
            the Portuguese economy was deemed to be a consequence of the high levels of private debt, increasing
            ULC, an inefficient non-tradable sector, and a low level of exports. Some modest progress has been made
            in rebalancing the economy.



            (225) Prior to the crisis, exports of goods and services were around 20% and 6% of GDP respectively, which is about half of what
                  countries of the same size export. Moreover, these percentages were quite stable: Portugal seemed to be losing the train of
                  globalization.




126
                                                                                                                    8. Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges




There has been some rebalancing from the non-tradable to the tradable sector both in terms of
Gross Value Added (GVA) and employment. Since the beginning of the crisis, the GVA of the tradable
sector has grown from 74% to 82% of GVA of the non-tradable sector (Graph 8.5b). The reason is partly
the collapse of the construction sector, included in the non-tradable sector, but also the relative resilience
of the tradable sector. The tradable sector weathered the crisis better than other sectors, most likely
because of the support of external demand. Behind this increase of the tradable sector is the strong
performance of the wholesale and retail trade and the manufacturing sectors. In terms of employment, the
tradable sector has increased its share in the active population from 42% to 46%. Overall, it is too soon to
conclude that there is some permanent sectoral shift but the current strong growth of the tradable sector
points in this direction.

                                            Graph 8.5a: Relative price of tradables                                    Graph 8.5b: Weight of tradables

                                     1.15                                                                     90
  Ratio tradables to non-tradables




                                                                                                              85
                                      1.1
                                                                                        % GVA non-tradables

                                                                                                              80
                                     1.05
                                                                                                              75
                                       1
                                                                                                              70

                                     0.95
                                                                                                              65

                                      0.9                                                                     60
                                         01Q4 03Q3 05Q2 07Q1 08Q4 10Q3 12Q2 14Q1 15Q4                           01Q4 03Q3 05Q2 07Q1 08Q4 10Q3 12Q2 14Q1 15Q4

                                                           EA          PT                                                         EA         PT

  Source: Eurostat                                                                      Source: Eurostat


This positive reading is supported also by the good behaviour of exports across destinations and
type of goods exported. There is no single export destination explaining this good performance. Even
exports to Spain, Portugal's major trade partner affected by a severe recession, did relatively well.
Portugal depends largely on EU trade partners and intra-EU exports are showing a strong dynamism since
2011. Most types of goods contribute to the good export performance after the crisis, even industrial
supplies and capital goods. Exports of services have also increased, even faster than goods, rising from
24% to 28% of total exports, mainly because robust growth in tourism. Proceeds from travel services,
including tourism, increased from 7 to 11 billion euros between 2010 and 2015 accounting for half of the
increase in services' exports over the period. Other business services (26%), transport (17%), and
telecommunications, computer, and information services (5%) are the other leading categories explaining
the growth of exports. At the firm-level exporting firms have increased slightly their exports but the
proportion of exporting firms has remained relatively stable across sectors. (226) This means, first, that
exports were driven by external demand rather than searching for alternative markets to substitute for lost
local customers. Second, it means that within tradable sectors there is no structural change ongoing: it is
the sector as a whole that is performing well.




(226) See Correia, A.L., Gouveia, A.F., (2016)




                                                                                                                                                                         127
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




                                  Graph 8.6a: Main goods' export destinations                                Graph 8.6b: Exports of goods by categories
                                 14                                                                     18
                                 12                                                                     16
                                                                                                        14
                                 10
                                                                                                        12




                                                                                       Billion EUR
                Billion EUR




                                  8                                                                     10
                                  6                                                                      8
                                                                                                         6
                                  4
                                                                                                         4
                                  2                                                                      2
                                  0                                                                      0
                                        07   08   09   10   11   12   13    14   15                           95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                                                                     Food                             Industrial supplies
                                             ES             DE             FR
                                             UK             US             AN                                        Fuels                            Capital goods
                                             IT             NL             BE                                        Transport equipment              Consumer goods
              Source: Eurostat                                                        Source: Eurostat


            This rebalancing to the tradable sector is certainly related to external demand but there are signs of
            deeper changes, notably the improvement of the terms of trade after two decades of stagnation. The
            recovery of the terms of trade after twenty years of stagnation points to some upgrading of Portuguese
            exports (Graph 8.7a). Further, if high wages were a drag on the external sector before the crisis, it does
            not seem to be the case anymore: the real effective exchange rate has dropped to levels before EMU
            (Graph 8.7b).

                                             Graph 8.7a: Terms of trade                                       Graph 8.7b: Real effective exchange rate
                                                                                                                              (ULC)
                                 110                                                                    105
                                 105
                                 100                                                                    100
                                  95
                                                                                       Index 2010=100
                Index 2010=100




                                  90                                                                    95
                                  85
                                  80                                                                    90
                                  75
                                  70                                                                    85
                                  65
                                  60                                                                    80
                                       61 65 69 73 77 81 85 89 93 97 01 05 09 13 17                            97   99    01    03    05    07   09    11    13    15   17

              Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast                            Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast


            The labour market turned the corner in 2013 and has continued to improve after the programme,
            though long-term unemployment remains stubbornly high. Portuguese employment appears to react
            swiftly to changing economic conditions: the rapid rise in unemployment till 2013 was followed by a
            rapid reduction. The reasons for this include that adjustments in employment levels are concentrated
            among less protected workers, and the high level of nominal wage rigidity. However, labour market
            developments do also partly appear to reflect the impact of reforms implemented during the adjustment
            programme. In particular, recent increases in employment mostly took the form of permanent contracts,
            suggesting that the reform of the employment protection legislation has helped reduce the bias towards
            temporary employment contracts. For the first time in more than a decade, the youth unemployment rate
            fell in 2014, partially reflecting the successful implementation of the Youth Guarantee Scheme. However,
            despite the rise in employment (157,000 persons since 2013) increases in economic activity do not seem




128
                                                                                                                                                                       8. Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges




to be associated with more employment creation than before the crisis. (227) Furthermore, the sharp
contraction in unemployment is partially due to emigration: since the recovery in 2013 to the (forecast)
end of 2016 the labour force will have shrunk by 102,000 persons and the total population has fallen by
158,000 persons. Furthermore, long-term unemployment has been slower to decline, with very long-term
unemployment (more than 24 months) still near its peak.

                           Graph 8.8a: Labor force and employment                                                                                                     Graph 8.8b: Working-age population
                     5400                                                                                                                                     7100

                     5200                                                                                                                                     7000
                     5000
                                                                                                                                                              6900
   Thousands




                                                                                                                                        Thousands
                     4800
                                                                                                                                                              6800
                     4600
                                                                                                                                                              6700
                     4400

                     4200                                                                                                                                     6600

                     4000                                                                                                                                     6500
                            09Q1
                                   09Q3
                                          10Q1
                                                 10Q3
                                                        11Q1
                                                               11Q3
                                                                      12Q1
                                                                             12Q3
                                                                                    13Q1
                                                                                           13Q3
                                                                                                  14Q1
                                                                                                         14Q3
                                                                                                                15Q1
                                                                                                                       15Q3
                                                                                                                              16Q1




                                                                                                                                                                      09Q1
                                                                                                                                                                             09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                    10Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                           10Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  11Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         11Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                12Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16Q1
                                             Labor force                            Employment                                                                                                    Working-age population
  Source: Eurostat                                                                                                                   Source: Eurostat



Real labour costs adjusted considerably in the private sector but public sector wages are still high
and may distort labour allocation. The upswing in exports was supported by favourable trends in
nominal unit labour costs (ULCs), particularly in the tradable sector, despite the presence of high nominal
wage rigidity. This was also reflected in the continuing drop in real ULC (Graph 8.9b). However, the fall
in ULCs in the tradable sector seems to have been reversed recently, highlighting the challenge of
generating employment while containing price pressures. The correction of ULCs in the non-tradable
sector was smaller in 2013 dampened by a partial reinstatement of wages in the public sector that had
been cut to support fiscal consolidation.

                                   Graph 8.9a: GDP per person employed                                                                                                         Graph 8.9b: Real unit labor costs

                     110                                                                                                                                      4
                     108                                                                                                                                      3
                     106
                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                      Annual rate of change




                     104
   Index, 2008=100




                     102                                                                                                                                      1

                     100                                                                                                                                      0
                      98                                                                                                                                      -1
                      96
                                                                                                                                                              -2
                      94
                      92                                                                                                                                      -3
                      90                                                                                                                                      -4
                             05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                                                                                                  05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

                                                               EA                    PT                                                                                                                  EA                   PT

  Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast                                                                                       Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast


The current account balance displayed a surplus for the first time since the Second World War
owing to the collapse of investment and a rebound of savings during the crisis. The collapse of
aggregate investment and the rebound in savings are led by the corporate sector (Graph 8.10b). Corporate

(227) A glance at the Okun curve with employment rather than unemployment reveals no structural shift in the relationship between
      changes in GDP and changes in employment (see European Commission, 2016).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               129
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            net lending experienced a large swing from –9.2% of GDP in 2008 to 6% in 2014, both because of
            increased corporate savings and decreased investment. Hence, despite substantial borrowing by the
            government, aggregate net lending has increased from –11% to 2% of GDP during this period.
            Households have been moderate net lenders both before and after the crisis so they have played no role in
            the rebalancing. The current account surplus is projected to remain stable over the forecast period (Graph
            8.10a). From the perspective of income flows, Portugal’s large external debt explains the negative net
            primary income partly offset by net current transfers (e.g. remittances) and net capital transactions (e.g.
            EU structural funds). All these flows are expected to remain stable so any future changes will come from
            changes in net exports, in turn reflecting changes in savings in excess of investment. For the time being,
            the recovery in investment has been offset by the rebound in savings. Further fiscal consolidation should
            support and consolidate this surplus.

                               Graph 8.10a: Decomposition of net lending                                          Graph 8.10b: Corporate saving and investment

                        10                                                                                  20

                                                                                                            15
                         5
                                                                                                            10
                         0
                % GDP




                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                      GDP




                         -5                                                                                  0

                        -10                                                                                  -5

                                                                                                            -10
                        -15
                              95   97   99   01    03    05     07     09        11   13   15   17          -15
                                              Net exports                                                         05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                              Net capital transactions
                                              Net primary income
                                              Net current transfers
                                                                                                                     Savings         Investment        Net lending
                                              Net lending (+) or borrowing (-)

              Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast                                           Source: AMECO database, 2016 Spring forecast


            Deleveraging in the corporate sector has been going on before, during and after the programme
            and it is still continuing. The collapse of corporate net borrowing is most likely the consequence of
            deleveraging efforts of the private sector, particularly the construction sector. The stock of bank loans to
            non-financial corporations has been decreasing considerably (Graph 8.11b). Although the last year has
            seen a deceleration of this process, it is likely to continue for some time. Hence, some reduction of the
            still high private debt may be expected in the coming years.




130
                                                                                                                                                                                        8. Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges




                                   Graph 8.11a: Cost of borrowing for NFC                                                                                                               Graph 8.11b: Changes in the stock of loans

                   7                                                                                                                                                      20

                   6                                                                                                                                                      15




                                                                                                                                                y-o-y percetnage change
                   5                                                                                                                                                      10
   Interest rate




                   4                                                                                                                                                       5

                   3                                                                                                                                                       0

                   2                                                                                                                                                       -5

                   1                                                                                                                                                      -10

                   0                                                                                                                                                      -15
                       08M01
                               08M08
                                       09M03
                                               09M10
                                                       10M05
                                                               10M12
                                                                       11M07
                                                                               12M02
                                                                                       12M09
                                                                                               13M04
                                                                                                       13M11
                                                                                                               14M06
                                                                                                                       15M01
                                                                                                                               15M08
                                                                                                                                       16M03




                                                                                                                                                                                08M01
                                                                                                                                                                                        08M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                09M03
                                                                                                                                                                                                        09M10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                10M05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10M12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11M07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12M02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12M09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13M04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14M06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15M01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15M08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16M03
                                                                       EA                 PT                                                                                                                              EA                     PT
  Source: ECB                                                                                                                                  Source: ECB




8.3.                   MACROECONOMIC RISKS AND MEDIUM-TERM CHALLENGES

Despite some external rebalancing, the Portuguese economy continues to be characterised by low
potential growth and high external debt. The main challenges remain high private and public
indebtedness, high unemployment, subdued technological progress, and an unfavourable demographic
outlook. There has been little progress in the skill-composition of the work force: although there has been
significant progress for younger cohorts, it will take time to be felt at the aggregate level. Production and
exports are still concentrated in low-tech, labour-intense sectors. The economy is showing early signs of
fundamental changes but there is still a long way to go from the level of performance needed to
sustainably correct the existing imbalances.

The high indebtedness of non-financial corporations remains a major vulnerability of the
Portuguese economy. Despite deleveraging in construction and real estate, debt remains high in most
sectors, especially manufacturing. Debt reduction has so far only been partially accommodated by the
insolvency and restructuring frameworks, which lately have been revised to focus on the recovery of
firms. Private corporate debt in Portugal stood at 146% of GDP on a non-consolidated basis in October
2015, some 20 pps lower than the peak level of 167.4% in 2012 but still more than 20 pps. higher than the
euro area average. The fact that banks are nearly the only channel for lending in Portugal adds to the
challenge. The other side of the coin of high corporate debt is represented by the level of NPL, especially
in the non-tradable sector. Aggregate NPLs have been burdening banks' balance sheets, increasing from
below 4% in 2008 to 11.9% by the end of 2015. (228)

The situation of the banking sector remains fragile, although there are differences across banks.
Market confidence has not been fully restored. Banks' access to debt and equity markets has remained
limited. As a consequence, the Portuguese banks present lower capital ratios and higher Eurosystem
reliance than the EU peers. The banking sector's current vulnerabilities extend beyond the high level of
NPLs. One-off financial operations, including capital gains from debt securities, and the overseas
operations have supported an increase in average income in 2015. However, the ongoing deleveraging of
the private debt, compounded by the low nominal interest rates, is compressing the banks' profitability,
while cost structures still present inefficiencies. Contingent liabilities for the state related to the banking
sector are posing fiscal risks, which can undermine the consolidation achieved so far, in case of negative
developments. The state-owned CGD remained loss-making in 2015. The resolution of BES is yet to be


(228) Source: Banco de Portugal. NPL ratio, as published by EBA, was 19.1%, as of the end of 2015. The difference is mainly due to
      different definitions of non-performing loans and the covered banks.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        131
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            completed, with Novo Banco also recording losses in 2015. The resolution of Banif started only in
            December 2015 and even the sale of the bad assets related to the resolution of BPN is not yet completed.

            Public debt is still very high, which requires continued fiscal discipline and makes it more difficult
            to engage in extensive public investment programmes. Shortcomings in the implementation of
            structural fiscal measures left the public finances vulnerable. A moderate decline in public debt would
            require sustained primary surpluses (see section 4.3). Also, public finances are still vulnerable to macro-
            economic and financial market shocks, which makes continued fiscal consolidation crucial and limits the
            room to manoeuvre for public investment. The market perception that major challenges lie ahead is
            reflected in the high and relatively volatile risk-premium of Portuguese government bonds (Graph 8.12).

                                                        Graph 8.12: Yield 10-year government bond in 2016

                                                 450
                                                 400
                                                 350
                                                 300
                                                 250
                                          b.p.




                                                 200
                                                 150
                                                 100
                                                  50
                                                    0
                                                        04/01
                                                        11/01
                                                        18/01
                                                        25/01
                                                        01/02
                                                        08/02
                                                        15/02
                                                        22/02
                                                        29/02
                                                        07/03
                                                        14/03
                                                        21/03
                                                        28/03
                                                        04/04
                                                        11/04
                                                        18/04
                                                        25/04
                                                        02/05
                                                        09/05
                                                        16/05




                                                            ES         IT        FR         PT         DE

                                                 Source: DataInsight


            There is a risk that unemployment stabilises at high levels. Long-term and youth unemployment,
            combined with low-skills prevalence remain serious challenges. Unemployment in Portugal is high and
            the labour market is still segmented. The labour market continues to be relatively rigid and the
            functioning of the collective bargaining system is not leading to firm-level (or firm-specific) adjustments:
            firm-level bargaining is not picking up. The large proportion of young people and people unemployed for
            more than one year is becoming a structural issue. Stronger output growth and successful implementation
            of the reforms to active labour market policies and vocational education are needed to combat these types
            of unemployment. The low skill level of the Portuguese workforce weighs on productivity and hampers
            innovation and the redirection of production towards higher-value products. Improving the skills of the
            work force through continuing reforms in education will therefore be vital to durably lifting Portugal's
            growth potential.

            The surplus in the current account is expected to partially reverse while external liabilities are still
            very high. Weak domestic demand explains a large part of the current account surplus. The recovery will
            most likely partially reverse it in the medium term. In itself the recovery of demand is a positive
            development but it means that the absorption of the external debt will require faster GDP growth. In the
            short-term, however, the European Commission's 2016 Spring forecast expects the current account to
            remain in a surplus below 1% until the end of 2017.

            Sustainable growth requires further improvements in external competitiveness and the efficient
            allocation of resources. Stronger reallocation of resources towards the tradable sectors with higher-
            productivity is needed. Despite the resilience of exports during the crisis, Portuguese firms remain
            specialised in relatively low-tech goods. Service exports have gained in importance but as a proportion of
            GDP they are still lower than in other small and open European countries. It may be difficult for Portugal
            to rely on cost-based improvements in its external competitiveness, as further improvements in cost
            developments would have to take place in a low inflation environment. This may prove challenging given



132
                                                            8. Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges




the inefficiencies and rigidities in the domestic market. Maintaining the reform momentum in product,
services and labour markets and corporate restructuring could help ensure that capital is allocated
efficiently to where it is most productive.




                                                                                                                 133
9.          CONCLUSIONS

The formulation of the conclusions and lessons learned is based on the analysis conducted in
Sections 2 – 8 of the evaluation. This Section presents the conclusions and lessons learned in the
framework of the five original evaluation questions.

In spring 2011 Portugal lost market access at sustainable rates and requested external financial
assistance. The Portuguese crisis mainly resulted from a combination of poor economic performance
over a number of years and unsustainable public finances. Poor economic performance was deeply-rooted
in structural deficiencies affecting the functioning of the economy and in a large and inefficient public
sector. Funds borrowed abroad had not been used for productivity-enhancing investments in the tradable
sector and had led to the accumulation of significant external indebtedness in all sectors. The banking
system was the main intermediary between the domestic financing needs and the external financing
sources. The 2008 international financial crisis triggered only a marginal correction of existing
imbalances. The uncertainty over the macroeconomic outlook and the fiscal dynamics contributed to
increasing funding costs for both the government and the banking system up to unsustainable levels. In
March 2011, the Portuguese parliament rejected the Stability Programme, prepared by the government to
consolidate the fiscal position. At the same time, 2010 figures for budget deficits and public debt were
revised upwards, mainly to reflect the reclassification of a number of public transport state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) in the general government. These events triggered the request for external financial
assistance.

The programme objectives were relevant in relation to these economic challenges. They were: (i)
Covering Portugal's financing gap during the adjustment; (ii) Putting the public finances on a sustainable
footing; (iii) Underpinning a return to economic growth, supporting an orderly unwinding of external and
internal imbalances, while increasing the growth potential of the economy through in-depth structural
reforms; (iv) Stabilising the financial sector. These objectives aimed at restoring financial market
confidence in the economy, the sovereign and banks. In the medium/long term, these objectives were seen
as instrumental to secure macro-financial stability, achieve fiscal sustainability, and increase trend
growth.

The evaluation considers the programme to be a relative success to the extent that Portugal has
regained market access but challenges remain. The programme helped regaining market access at
relatively low rates. However, doubts continue to linger in light of the need to further improve the
structural soundness of public finances and the banking system. The assessment of the implementation
and effects of structural reforms is mixed. The current yield of Portuguese government bonds, well above
peers like Spain or Ireland, as well as the spike during the turmoil in early 2016 bears witness of the
market concerns about the credibility of the adjustment and the challenges ahead.


How well did the objectives correspond to the challenges faced by Portugal (relevance)?
The evaluation found that the objectives of the economic adjustment programme were relevant and
that the measures included in the programme were broadly focused on the appropriate issues. In
the absence of market access at sustainable rates, Portugal could not cover the upcoming financing needs.
This gap had to be closed and confidence in the sovereign had to be restored. Fiscal measures were
necessary as public finances were not on a sustainable footing, given large and persistent public deficits,
high and increasing public debt and significant weaknesses in fiscal governance. The uncertainty about
the development of public finances was compounded by significant internal and external macroeconomic
imbalances accumulated over a long period of poor economic performance. An extensive package of
structural reforms was necessary. There was also a need to strengthen the banking sector.

Under tight constraints, the programme rightly targeted an ambitious fiscal consolidation,
underpinned by a number of fiscal governance and structural reform measures. The programme
aimed at rapidly bringing down the public deficit and putting public debt on a downward trajectory. The



                                                                                                              135
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            envisaged fiscal path was ambitious but a more gradual consolidation path would have implied significant
            risks, given the uncertainty at the inception of the programme about debt evolution. A comprehensive
            reform of the Budgetary Framework Law was envisaged to address the existing vulnerabilities in fiscal
            governance. Fiscal-structural measures targeted the most evident inefficiencies and sources of risk, but
            lacked a comprehensive strategy. On the one hand, conditionality did not immediately and
            comprehensively enough focus on a number of important structural drivers of expenditure inefficiencies,
            including in the social security and public wage bill. On the other hand, conditionality contained a
            number of measures that could hardly be considered as macro critical, such as the reduction of parishes or
            the cost/benefit analysis of support to foundations.

            The comprehensive package of structural reforms included in the programme was a broadly
            adequate response to Portugal's long-standing weaknesses, but a sharper focus on the most macro-
            critical issues could have been warranted. Reflecting the broad-based economic inefficiencies at the
            root of the crisis, the programme touched on many policy areas covering the labour and products markets,
            with the overall aim of increasing potential output and boosting productivity. This represented a step
            change in the momentum of reform in a country in which necessary reforms had not been forthcoming.
            Nevertheless, this extensive coverage meant a lack of prioritisation of the most important macro-critical
            issues, especially in the product markets field. This may have been the result of using the programme to
            embrace reforms which were meant to happen anyway (e.g. transposition of EU Directives).

            The programme rightly aimed at strengthening the banking sector and accompanying the
            correction of the country's imbalances. Banks were required to strengthen their solvency and funding
            profile, under the supervision of Banco de Portugal (BdP). The availability of the Bank Solvency Support
            Facility (BSSF) funds and the prompt introduction of an insolvency framework were expected to help
            preserve financial stability. In light of the existing high public contingent liabilities, the conditionality
            covered the state-owned banks. It required selling Banco Português de Negócios (BPN) and streamlining
            - but not to fully privatise - Caixa Geral de Depósitos (CGD), the largest Portuguese bank. The reform of
            the corporate insolvency framework was rightly envisaged, to facilitate the correction of the imbalances.
            Other initiatives aimed at facilitating the provision of credit to viable firms. In particular, the programme
            partners envisaged BdP to monitor the consistency of the adjustment process with the macro-economic
            developments, in light of the expected banks' balance sheet downsizing. They also encouraged the
            assessment of the system of government guarantees for SMEs and the consideration of extra-bank
            financing alternatives, but they did not indicate stringent deadlines and medium term objectives.

            The programme rightly addressed social concerns in many of the covered policy areas but
            monitoring and systematic reporting of social outcomes was not set out as a requirement in the
            Memorandum of Understanding on Specific Economic Policy Conditionality (MoU). The programme
            used many different sectoral policies to mitigate the social impact of the adjustment. The issue of a fair
            burden of the adjustment was rated as important by the authorities and programme partners. Nevertheless,
            more emphasis on monitoring and reporting on the social dimension would have been warranted.

            What has been learned:

            When a crisis is rooted in broad-based economic and fiscal inefficiencies, programmes should include a
            wide package of structural and fiscal-structural reforms, embedded in a clear strategy which allows a
            focus on the most macro-critical weaknesses affecting the functioning of the economy and the
            sustainability of public finances. Including other reforms risks overstretching administrative capacity and
            making decisions on the completion of the regular programme reviews more complex.

            Strengthening and cleaning the banking sector is a crucial part of facilitating the correction of a
            country's macro-imbalances. This correction also requires other policy measures, including fostering
            private debt restructuring and maintaining an adequate level of credit to viable firms.




136
                                                                                                          9. Conclusions




The social impact of the crisis and of the adjustment process should be regularly monitored and reported
upon in programme documents.


Was conditionality appropriate in relation to the intended outputs and results (efficiency)?
Given the information available at the time, the originally planned fiscal consolidation path and the
subsequent flexibility were both appropriate. The programme partners gradually and rightfully
accepted a less frontloaded consolidation path, as Portugal's access to the sovereign debt market
increased, also on the back of the more accommodative monetary policy and improved official lending
terms. A budget-neutral fiscal devaluation was abandoned because of lack of space for compensatory
measures and strong political opposition. It was not replaced by a non-budget-neutral solution, which
could have implied significant risks for the public finances, while not achieving its full potential and
without changing the structural features of the economy.

Some measures to achieve a frontloaded reduction of expenditure were appropriate but
consolidation was excessively based on one-offs and temporary measures. The ambitious
consolidation path was intended to rely on significant expenditure cuts. However, in the absence of an in-
depth reform of the public sector and social security, underpinned by an exhaustive spending review, that
could have been expected to deliver upfront substantial savings, the frontloaded expenditure-based
approach implied extensive recourse to one-off and temporary, horizontal measures. Some of these
measures may have been inefficient and may have contributed to weaker than expected growth outcomes.
Ultimately Portugal shied away from pursuing the difficult expenditure measures that would help it over
the medium term. This being said, some areas of structural inefficiency were properly tackled. Reduction
of public staff and health costs, restructuring of SOEs and public-private partnerships (PPPs) were the
main drivers of the sustained improvement of public finances.

Given the circumstances in 2013, it was appropriate to also rely on revenue-based consolidation,
through tax increases and measures to improve the efficiency of tax administration. During the
second part of the programme, due to difficulties in securing expenditure savings, also explained by
constraining rulings of the Constitutional Court, the consolidation effort appropriately turned to be more
revenue-based than initially projected. Overall, this move may have supported short-term demand, while
giving more time for implementing expenditure cuts. The main measures covered PIT, VAT, taxation on
immovable property, CIT and the efficiency of the revenue administration. They were broadly
appropriate.

A more balanced composition of consolidation already during the first half of the programme
would have been more efficient if coupled with stronger focus on structural reforms on the
expenditure side. Given the planned consolidation path, more revenue based fiscal consolidation at the
beginning of the programme could have contributed to reduce recourse to one-off and temporary
expenditure measures, while allowing more time to design appropriate structural expenditure measures to
be implemented later in the programme. This approach should have been accompanied by an overall
strategy to reform the public sector and social security, which could have helped foster political
consensus and sustained ownership on medium/long term objectives. The existence of a clear strategic
plan for a comprehensive reform of the state and an in-depth spending review could have helped optimise
the selection of the measures to be included in the programme. Overall, this could also have reduced the
risk of negative rulings by the Constitutional Court.

The conditionality for structural reforms was overall well designed but the lack of clear and
properly communicated priorities contributed to uneven implementation of structural reforms. The
structural reforms were overall well designed but there were important cases of insufficient or delayed
implementation, especially for products market reforms. A number of intended policies were highly
politically or socially sensitive or impacted on strong vested interests (e.g. energy, regulated professions




                                                                                                                     137
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            or ports). Clearer communication on the necessity of structural reforms and their longer-term benefits
            might have helped overcome some of the resistance to reforms and contain reform fatigue.

            Structural reforms were meant to be frontloaded, but in practice this was only the case for labour
            market reforms. The initial programme MoU stated that structural reforms would be frontloaded, but
            there was no specific target on the sequencing between labour market and product market reforms This
            was deemed not to be realistic for the programme design given the relatively short three-year programme
            horizon. On balance it was right to frontload those labour market reforms that could be implemented
            relatively quickly, rather than delaying them for reasons of sequencing. But the overall sequencing,
            effectiveness and fairness of reforms could have been improved by faster progress on reforming product
            markets and protected sectors. Reforms that involved taking on vested interests tended to be delayed.

            Programme design and implementation should have pursued a more frontloaded adjustment of the
            banks' balance sheet. The programme design envisaged the combination of stress tests and asset quality
            reviews to contribute to the estimation of the banks' capital needs. However, the stress tests did not foster
            prompt actions to improve the resilience of all the covered banks. The asset quality reviews required
            repeated rounds to ensure adequate assessment of the banks' asset quality. With BdP responsible for the
            design and implementation of the bank recapitalisation, the programme strategy could have better
            emphasized the importance of the different strategies, provided more detailed guidance and put more
            pressure on implementation. A more forceful supervisory approach could have been beneficial in
            accelerating the balance sheet adjustment, including with respect to Banif and Banco Espírito Santo
            (BES). The implementation of the bank resolution framework occurred swiftly and represented an
            important programme achievement.

            In particular, the issue related to the high level of non-performing loans (NPLs) should have been
            tackled earlier and more effectively. NPLs kept on increasing during the programme, as new
            problematic loans appeared while existing ones were worked out or disposed of in only limited amounts.
            The slow progress in reducing NPLs was accompanied by decreases in bank loans and a slow reduction of
            private debt. Effective supervisory policies to tackle existing NPLs were not promptly introduced, while
            mechanisms to facilitate the developments of the distressed debt markets might have been constrained by
            the state's limited capacity to provide guarantees. Bank supervision should have been tighter with regard
            to provisioning and write-offs. The revision of the insolvency framework occurred swiftly but required
            some amendments to improve the corporates' rescue and restructuring process. An earlier optimization of
            the framework and a more ambitious approach to corporate debt workout could have helped reduce both
            private debt and NPLs.

            The slow progress in fostering extra-bank lending to viable business can be understood but more
            progress in developing the capital markets could have been arguably achieved. Bank lending to
            viable business declined as a result of decreasing credit demand and credit supply. Initiatives to foster
            extra-bank financing were introduced relatively slowly, as the focus on these measures increased only
            after stabilizing the banks. Moreover, the implementation of extra-bank financing tools required some
            time to ensure their proper functioning. Better coordination at the level of both the Portuguese authorities
            and the EU authorities could have further contributed to foster the development of the capital markets,
            which in turn could have been helpful in promoting proper risk assessment and credit allocation, and
            addressing the bias in the corporate sector that was favouring debt rather than equity.

            The programme enabled Portugal to avoid a sharp immediate adjustment in its economic and
            social situation. In the absence of a programme, the Portuguese sovereign would have been unable to
            meet its obligations, leading to an immediate sharp adjustment with widespread economic and social
            consequences. Most programme measures took equity and social considerations into account, although
            some measures (or lack thereof) failed to ensure progressive burden-sharing of the adjustment or in
            protecting the lowest income groups. Overall spending on social protection was reduced if compared to a
            scenario of no changes in legislation. During the programme period, Portugal experienced an increase in



138
                                                                                                         9. Conclusions




poverty and social exclusion. One of the main drivers of the increasing incidence of poverty was the fast
increase in unemployment. This being said, fiscal consolidation measures up to 2012 had a progressive
impact and an increase in inequality (measured by the Gini coefficient) was avoided in recent years.

What has been learned:

At the very beginning of the programme, an overall strategic plan, underpinned by an in-depth spending
review, should be set to steer and frame the ensuing fiscal effort. This plan should be immediately
followed by further analysis to single out a few reforms on which political capital and administrative
capacity should be prioritised. For these reforms, detailed implementation plans should become
gradually part of the MoU with strong specific monitoring. The use of technical assistance should be
considered.

When an upfront comprehensive strategy for expenditure cannot be undertaken quickly, it may be more
effective to focus on revenue increases, even when there is a clear need for expenditure cuts. This should
buy more time for implementing structural expenditure measures, while limiting the recourse to one-off
and temporary measures.

High levels of domestic political and social sensitivity and strong vested interests can lead to delays and
mixed implementation of key structural reforms. Strong prioritisation and clear communication are
necessary for maintaining national ownership of the reform process, overcoming resistance and
achieving implementation of fair and efficient reforms.

The necessary labour market reforms should be implemented without delay. If product market reforms
cannot proceed at the same pace, they must be accelerated as much as possible in order to make the
overall process more effective and fair.

The bank capital requirements should reflect credible assumptions on the losses yet to be realised.
Independent top-down and bottom-up assessments are instrumental to increase transparency and
confidence about the estimation of capital needs. Losses should, in turn, be promptly recognised.

A publicly available analysis about the advantages and drawback of different options to tackle NPLs is
helpful. Reducing NPLs requires the prompt implementation of a balanced combination of different
policies, including enhancing supervision, developing distressed debt markets, facilitating company
restructuring.

Active capital markets are an important buffer for financing the real economy when the banking sector is
under restructuring. Their development is difficult in a programme context, when other immediate
pressures are high, and requires time and coordinated efforts from national and supranational
authorities.

While it is known that economic crises and the subsequent adjustment can have high social costs, the
distributional and social implications are generally difficult to estimate accurately at the start of the
programme. However, programme measures should be shaped to take equity and social considerations
into account, aiming at progressive burden-sharing and protection of the most vulnerable.


Was the disbursement of the financial assistance appropriate (efficiency)?
The amount of financial assistance was rightly set to cover the estimated funding gap over the
programme. The programme was prudent in assuming limited recourse to short-term debt. The
funding gap was estimated on the basis of the projected amortisation of government debt, cumulative
state deficits, support for the recapitalisation of the banking sector and remaining needs of the wider
public-sector, including the clearance of arrears. It was correctly based on the assumption of continued



                                                                                                                    139
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            but reduced reliance on issuing short-term debt and gradual resumption of access to long-term debt
            market. Nevertheless, the financial envelope did not include potential needs arising from SOEs debt and
            the build-up of a cash buffer before programme exit.

            Frontloading of disbursement was appropriate but it contributed to a reduction of the
            programme's leverage over time. It was appropriate to earmark the amount available for the
            banking sector. Together with the return to market access, the frontloaded disbursements allowed the
            cash buffer to be significant and enabled Portugal to forego the final tranche. This frontloading probably
            also contributed to a weakening of the consolidation and structural efforts during the second part of the
            programme. This being said, until the second half of the programme, the risks looked like firmly on the
            side of the envelope being too small rather than too large. Reducing the frontloading would have likely
            led to substantial pressure and uncertainty about Portugal's ability to implement the programme. In this
            context, it was appropriate to earmark the amount available for the banking sector.

            Changes to the EFSM/EFSF lending terms were appropriate; consideration could nevertheless have
            been given to a parallel strengthening programme conditionality. The changes to the European
            Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM) lending
            terms had a positive impact on deficit and debt sustainability, facilitating the return to the markets,
            including because of their signalling effect. Conditioning the improvements in the lending conditions
            might have allowed to keep a better hold on government policy and thereby might have underpinned a
            stronger reform momentum.

            The early repayment of IMF loans is another shift in the gradual differentiation of the roles of the
            IMF and the euro area. IMF loans still include interest rate margins which make IMF loans,
            proportionally in a low interest rate environment, more expensive than market financing. These
            differences are not fully aligned with the G20 principles for cooperation between the IMF and regional
            financing arrangements, which foresee consistency of lending conditions to the extent possible, in order
            to prevent arbitrage and facility shopping. With the de facto waiving of the so-called pari passu clause,
            the EU gradually bears more risks.

            What has been learned:

            Assumptions about financing needs should be prudent so as to reflect the uncertainties prevailing at the
            time, such as contingent liabilities of the public sector and market access developments. The size of the
            financial envelope should add credibility to the programme's overall objective of facilitating return to the
            sovereign financial markets.

            Earmarking the financial envelope for the banking sector helps prevent its use for other needs especially
            in the presence of a delayed adjustment of the banks' balance sheet.

            A specified target for cash buffer developments should be part of the programme envelope design. The
            latter contributes to market access and a clean exit from the programme, but can reduce the incentives
            for reform over time.


            To what extent have the objectives of the economic adjustment programme been achieved or
            can be expected to materialise in the medium / long term (effectiveness)?
            In relation to the objective of covering Portugal's financing gap, the financing envelope was
            sufficient but only because of the increased access to market funding. Overall, the Portuguese
            programme met the sovereign financing needs in a dynamic and resilient way to changing circumstances.
            Contrary to projections, the short-term debt rollover rate reached 100% for the whole programme. State
            refinancing was facilitated by domestic banks buying more T-bills than expected, which in turn was
            facilitated by the Eurosystem refinancing conditions. During the second part of the programme, Portugal



140
                                                                                                         9. Conclusions




also made higher than expected recourse to the medium-long term market, on the back of favourable
market conditions. This strongly contributed to meet higher than expected financing needs, including the
build-up of a sizeable cash buffer.

In relation to the objective of putting the public finances on a sustainable footing, the programme
succeeded in reducing the fiscal deficit, stabilising public debt and better controlling fiscal risks.
The evolution of the 'budget net of one-offs' points to a reduction of the deficit, from 8.6% to 3.4% of
GDP. The structural balance improved by 6.6 pps, broadly in line with the overall improvement requested
under the Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) procedure for the same period. Privatization proceeds
achieved their target and allowed a further reduction of the debt and of the ensuing contingent liabilities
for the state. Gross public debt peaked in 2014 and started decreasing in 2015, including due to the use of
cash reserves to finance early repayments to IMF. The programme improved the control over the
dynamics of central PPPs and SOEs. Fiscal governance improved, but some weaknesses remained.
Significant progress has been made in settling arrears, thanks to the special settlement programmes.

Challenges to fiscal sustainability remain. Partly because of the temporary character of some of the
measures, continued fiscal consolidation and structural reforms for sustained growth remain
crucial. According to the European Commission's 2016 Spring forecast, after programme exit, while
Portugal is under post-programme surveillance (PPS), the structural balance deteriorated and was
expected to worsen further, including due to the reversal without replacement of temporary measures
adopted during the programme; other measures have been unwound. The consolidation of some
corporates' liabilities in the general government perimeter should favour better control of the dynamics of
the public debt, although risks can still materialize from high contingent liabilities. The new Budget
Framework Law was reformed after the end of the programme but its implementation is expected to take
several years, while significant expenditure slippages still occurred in 2015. The debt trajectory is
particularly vulnerable to a loosening of fiscal discipline and negative economic developments. Continued
fiscal consolidation and sustained growth are essential to put debt on a clear downward slope.

In relation to the objective of strengthening the banking sector, the banks' situation improved but
vulnerabilities persist. The capitalisation of the Portuguese banking system increased and the funding
structure improved during the programme, but not all weaknesses were promptly addressed, as also
shown by the post programme resolution of BES and Banif. The NPL increase that occurred during the
programme period has not been followed by a significant decrease. Banking sector's profitability
remained protractedly negative, and 2015 aggregate improvements are yet to be confirmed on a sustained
basis and for all the main domestic banks. All these elements weakened the process of fully restoring
market confidence towards the banking sector, posing further pressure on (risk weighted) assets and
limiting the reduction in the Eurosystem financing.

Despite the slow progress in developing financial instruments outside the banking system, lending
conditions to viable companies have improved for more productive and export-oriented sectors.
Private debt remains high. Continued rebalancing of the economy towards the tradable sectors would
also help accelerate the reduction of private debt and NPLs and, in a virtuous loop, further improve
lending conditions. The still high private indebtedness and the ensuing ongoing deleveraging efforts are
set to weigh on the banks' balance sheets.

In relation to the objective of underpinning a return to growth, GDP started increasing in 2013
after a deeper and longer than expected contraction. Since then growth has been at the euro area
average, so no catch-up has so far occured. The contraction of the Portuguese economy and the rise in
unemployment exceeded expectations. Growth turned positive in late 2013 but real GDP in 2015 is still
below its 2010 peak. The current account balance displayed a surplus for the first time since the Second
World War owing to the collapse of investment and a rebound of savings during the crisis. During and
after the programme, exports showed some remarkable resilience playing an important role in the
recovery. The upswing in exports was supported by favourable trends in nominal unit labour costs



                                                                                                                    141
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            (ULCs) although the fall in ULCs in the tradable sector has recently partially reversed. The performance
            of exports induced some rebalancing towards the tradable sector but it is too soon to conclude that there is
            a permanent sectoral shift or that the economy will be more open in the future.

            Structural reforms contributed to some competitiveness gains but their full effects will only appear
            in the medium-long term. Some structural reforms in the programme are having a positive impact (in
            particular labour market and housing market reforms) but further progress is needed. There is still a need
            for systematic assessment of the impact of structural reforms, while many of the changes that Portugal has
            been seeking to put in place are long-term endeavours. Simulations suggest that reforms implemented
            under the economic adjustment programme may boost GDP and employment by 2020.

            Some macroeconomic risks and medium-term challenges have yet to be addressed to support the
            sustained recovery of the Portuguese economy. The net international investment position (NIIP)
            position has broadly stabilised at a very high level and its reduction will require persistent and sizeable
            current account surpluses. The high indebtedness of non-financial corporations remains a major
            vulnerability, as deleveraging started but it is set to continue. The banking sector is still vulnerable and
            can pose fiscal risks due to the existing contingent liabilities of the state. Public debt is still very high and
            its trajectory is still vulnerable to macro-economic and financial market shock. This requires continued
            fiscal discipline and makes more difficult to engage in extensive public investment programmes. Looking
            ahead, investment is recovering but the investment rate is still low when compared to the euro area. In the
            labour market, while the unemployment rate peaked in 2013 and has been improving since, partially due
            to emigration, there is a risk it will stabilise at high levels with a large proportion of long-term
            unemployment.

            What has been learned:

            When consolidation is excessively based on temporary measures, further improvements may still be
            needed after the end of the programme. In a climate of reform fatigue, the expiration of temporary
            measures or the unwinding of other measures without proper replacement is a sign of the insufficient
            leverage of post-programme surveillance. The corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) can
            help deliver some of the needed improvements, as would be the case with any other EU country.

            Restoration of banks' viability and market confidence go hand in hand, in a mutually reinforcing process.
            Policy aimed at addressing the weaknesses of a banking sector in a country subject to a macro
            adjustment should be implemented promptly and forcefully, in order to avoid delayed tackling of
            problems that could jeopardise the overall programme's achievements.


            What was the rationale for an intervention at EU level and was it coherent with other EU policies?
            Anchoring the action of the Portuguese authorities to a set of measures agreed with, and regularly
            monitored by, the European Commission and the other two partner institutions added to the
            credibility of the adjustment. This credibility allowed the adjustment to be implemented flexibly
            when needed. Credibility was mainly based on the content of the programme (including the size of
            financial assistance) and the ownership of the Portuguese authorities. As mentioned during the
            stakeholder consultation, the involvement of the European Commission, IMF and ECB (i) added expertise
            and a European/international perspective to the programme design; (ii) added to the credibility of the
            adjustment and allowed the adjustment to be implemented flexibly when needed. Monitoring by the
            programme partners reduced information asymmetries and allowed the necessary changes to
            conditionality not to be perceived as a sign of wavering commitments by Portugal.

            Ownership of the programme by the Portuguese authorities weakened in the second half of the
            programme. Portugal implemented a wide range of measures during the first half of the programme.
            Consultation with the main opposition parties and other civil society partners before and during the



142
                                                                                                          9. Conclusions




negotiation of the adjustment programme contributed to this ownership. The setup by the Portuguese
government of an ad hoc unit (ESAME) for programme monitoring improved coordination and
implementation capability. Later in the programme, reform fatigue kicked in and the momentum
weakened, when the finalisation of important structural reforms would have been necessary to consolidate
achievements and progress further. The absence of a clear plan for a comprehensive reform of the state in
the programme and of clear communication on structural reforms may have contributed to this outcome.
Another contributing factor may have been the relaxation of the financial constraints as Portugal returned
to the market.

The programme kicked in before the crisis really bit. This was appropriate, but may have had an
impact on ownership. The macroeconomic adjustment was inevitable. Although it is not possible to
construct a credible counterfactual at a time of such changing economic conditions in both Portugal and
its partners, the programme made this adjustment less harsh. In the case of Portugal, the programme
started before the economic and social impact of the crisis was clearly felt. While this early start was
beneficial, it may have led to the programme being blamed for the worsening economic situation and may
subsequently have had a negative impact on ownership of the most difficult adjustment measures.

The involvement of the EU was necessary to deliver an adequate financing envelope. The programme
could not have been done by Portugal on its own, or by the IMF alone. The size of the financial assistance
re-assured the markets, allowed the fiscal adjustment to be gradual, supported the stabilisation of the
banking sector, and prevented an immediate and dramatic adjustment with widespread economic and
social consequences. In addition, the use of financial resources at EU/EA level (EFSM/EFSF), rather than
relying only on bilateral loans, allowed Portuguese to benefit from very low costs once the interest rate
margins were removed.

The involvement of the EU programme partners contributed to ensure coherence with other EU
policies and the Portuguese experience helped inform the design and clarification of new EU/EA
frameworks. Wider EU initiatives contributed significantly to the programme's success. At the time
when the Portuguese programme was put together, the so-called "Six Pack" of legislation was being
negotiated at EU level. This contained the Directive on national budgetary frameworks. In May 2013, the
Directive was supplemented by the "Two Pack". This mandated a role for independent bodies in the
preparation of EA countries' budgets and in the monitoring of their fiscal rules. Initiatives at EU level,
such as the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme, contributed to improve market sentiment
on sovereign risk with positive spill-over in the banking sector.

The programme targets were aligned with the Stability and Growth Pact. In order to achieve this, the
EDP was adjusted to reflect the evolution of macroeconomic conditions, by extending the deadline for
achieving the 3% deficit. This was an important step in ensuring coherence.

What has been learned:

The intervention at EU level adds significant value in terms of expertise, credibility, coherence with other
EU policies and provides for an adequate financing envelope at very low costs.

Sustained ownership is crucial for programme success. However, ownership can be negatively affected by
several factors, including the absence of a strong plan for the most comprehensive reforms, of clear
communication on structural reforms long term benefits and on the distributional impact of the reforms,
as well as the relaxation of the financial constraints once the country returns to the market. Overall,
reform fatigue and time needed for structural reforms to be implemented and yield results raise questions
about the optimal duration of a programme and the trade-off between ownership and return to the
market.




                                                                                                                     143
      ANNEX 1
      Evaluation process

      1. Evaluation method/process

      The purpose of the ex post evaluation was to assess the economic adjustment programme for
      Portugal (May 2011 – June 2014) in order to draw lessons for future decision-making and identify
      areas of improvement for similar on-going or possible future interventions. The evaluation consisted
      of an ex post assessment of the economic objectives, content and results of the programme. It assessed the
      relevance, efficiency, effectiveness of the fiscal policies, structural reforms and measures to support the
      banking sector, in the context of the macroeconomic situation of Portugal and the economic challenges it
      faced. The evaluation draws conclusions also on the added value of an intervention at EU level and
      coherence with other EU policies. The analysis is primarily economic and based on data analysis gathered
      from a broad range of sources. This has been supplemented by economically informed programme
      specific input obtained through a targeted stakeholder consultation. The evaluation is based on
      information available up to the end of June 2016.

      The evaluation has been designed to comply with both the Commission's evaluation standards and
      international best practice. This annex describes the main procedural and methodological aspects of the
      evaluation introduced to ensure compliance with these principles. First, it describes the institutional
      arrangements to ensure the independence and impartiality of the evaluation exercise. Then it sets out the
      procedure that was followed in undertaking the evaluation. Finally it focuses on the targeted stakeholder
      consultation.

      1.1 Evaluation Questions

      The evaluation is structured around five evaluation questions:

      How well did the objectives correspond to the challenges faced by Portugal? This question mainly aims at
      assessing the relevance of the intervention;

      Was conditionality appropriate in relation to the intended outputs and results? This question mainly aims
      at assessing the efficiency of the intervention;

      Was the disbursement of the financial assistance appropriate? (Efficiency);

      To what extent have the objectives of the economic adjustment programme been achieved or can be
      expected to materialise in the medium/long term? This question aims at assessing the effectiveness of the
      intervention and considers the global picture, mainly from a quantitative point of view.

      What was the rationale for an intervention at EU level? This question aims at assessing the EU added-
      value of the intervention and the coherence with other relevant EU policies.

      1.2 Inter-Service Steering Group

      The Director General of the European Commission's Directorate General of Economic and
      Financial Affairs' (DG ECFIN) appointed an Interservice Steering Group (ISG) to oversee the
      evaluation and guarantee its independence. It was composed of senior officials from DG ECFIN, and
      officials from DG Competition (DG COMP), DG Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
      Markets Union (DG FISMA), DG Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion (DG EMPL) and the
      Secretariat General (SECGEN). The ISG provided guidance, ensured impartial supervision during the
      overall process and assessed the quality and usefulness of the final outcome of the evaluation. The
      evaluation was carried out by a team of ECFIN economists and not by the operational Unit in DG ECFIN
      in charge of the Portuguese programme.

      1.3 Key Deliverables



144
                                                                                                                          1. Evaluation process




In line with the EU Commission Better Regulation guidelines an evaluation roadmap was published
on 21st October 2015. After revision by the ISG, the evaluation roadmap was approved by the Director
General of DG ECFIN and published on the central, Commission Better Regulation website. The
roadmap summarised the design, purpose, scope, issues to be addressed and the evidence to be gathered
during the evaluation. Publication of the roadmap gave stakeholders an opportunity to provide feedback
on the proposed evaluation.

The evaluation inception report was submitted to the ISG who discussed and approved it on the 16th of
October. The inception report laid the groundwork for the subsequent data collection and analytical tasks.
It outlined the reasons behind the request for financial assistance from the Portuguese authorities,
presented the main elements of the programme, set out the evaluation methodology and put forward a
tentative timetable for each of the steps of the evaluation process.

Following the approval of the inception report, the evaluator proceeded with the collection of data on
which to base a comprehensive assessment of the programme. On the 17th of March 2016, after the data
collection had been finalised, the ISG discussed the Interim report. The interim report provided a detailed
analysis of the evidence gathered during the desk and field research that had been undertaken.

On the 31st of May 2016, the draft final report was discussed with the ISG. Overall, the draft final report
was covering all the evaluation issues with proper analysis and was assessed as a proper basis for the
workshop.

On the 14th of June 2016, the preliminary findings of the evaluation were discussed during a workshop
with academics and experts. The workshop was organised by the evaluator under the guidance of the ISG.
The final outcome of the evaluation benefited from the resulting open exchange of views.

After discussion on the 5th of July 2016, the ISG approved the final report. As mentioned, the ISG was
composed of representatives from DG ECFIN, DG COMP, DG FISMA, DG EMPL, and SECGEN.

The Portuguese authorities were called to express their views on the outcome of the ex post evaluation.
These views are published as an annex to the report.

1.4 Data Collection and Stakeholder Consultation

In addition to analytical work based on data and published documents, the evaluation team
engaged in a wide stakeholder consultation, covering individuals and bodies involved in the
programme, EU Member States, Portuguese authorities and other Portuguese stakeholders. The
inputs into the analytical work included publically available data, Commission, ECB and IMF reports,
documents published by the Portuguese authorities and other international organisations as well as private
sector and academic research. European Commission staff members who were involved in the Portuguese
programme participated in interviews and meetings with the evaluation team. (229). Meetings with
relevant representatives of the ECB, the IMF, the ESM and EFSM also took place. In addition, a targeted
stakeholder consultation, through written questionnaires, has been undertaken to contribute to a broad,
multi-dimensional and triangulated understanding of the economic and financial issues surrounding the
programme. This involved the Ministries of Finances of all EU Member States and a number of
Portuguese stakeholders. Further details are provided later in this annex. From the 15th to the 17th of
February 2016, meetings to collect information and assessments on a number of issues took place in
Lisbon with relevant Portuguese authorities/agencies. The evaluator contacted the relevant Unit at the
Ministry of Finance and sent the list of issues to be addressed during these meetings in advance. On the


(229) This included officials working in the Portuguese country desk (Unit ECFIN.G.2) or in relevant horizontal units – both during
      the evaluation and previously – and officials working in other DGs who had been involved in the design and implementation of
      the programme.




                                                                                                                                            145
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            basis of this list, this Unit provided assistance in identifying the relevant authorities/agencies and the
            appropriate interlocutors within and outside the Ministry of finance.

            To answer the evaluation questions, the evaluator focused on the lines of enquiry listed below:

            Match between the Programme's objectives and the challenges faced by Portugal: the evaluation
            considered the economic and financial situation in Portugal in the run-up to the request for financial
            assistance. The analysis of the build-up of external and domestic macroeconomic imbalances provided the
            necessary context. This served to assess whether the objectives of the programme were the right ones.

            Appropriateness of overall programme design and outcomes: the evaluation considered the efficiency of
            the economic adjustment programme. It assessed the economic rationale linking measures with intended
            results with a view to looking at its efficiency. The intention and result of the measures were looked at in
            terms of how and whether they contributed to the original objectives. The assessment consisted of a
            qualitative analysis, supplemented by the examination of relevant economic and financial data. The
            evaluation took into consideration the development of the overall context, including the broader
            international economic outlook, spill-over effects, changes in the euro area institutional framework and
            the ECB monetary policy measures. The evaluation included assessing the focus (230), pace and
            timing (231), flexibility of conditionality (232) and comprised an analysis of the development of a number
            of key socio-economic indicators for a better understanding of the extent to which the burden of
            adjustment has been evenly shared across Portuguese society.

            Achievement of the objectives of the economic adjustment programme: the evaluation identified and
            examined relevant economic/financial data and complemented this with a qualitative analysis.
            Considering that the evaluation started shortly after the end of the intervention, analysis focused on the
            results (short term) rather on the medium-long term impact of the intervention (which cannot be observed
            yet).

            Appropriateness of the programme financial envelope: the evaluation assessed whether the financial
            envelope adequately covered the financing gap and the need to ensure financial credibility also under
            adverse scenarios. This included an analysis of the indicators on the Portuguese sovereign's access to
            market during the programme period and a comparison with other EA countries and the EFSF/EFSM.

            Level of ownership and administrative capacity of the Portuguese authorities

            Rationale for an intervention at EU level: qualitative analysis focused on identifying the added-value of
            an EU-level intervention, in terms of EU-led policy dialogue and monitoring and the collection of
            financial resources at EU/EA level rather than only relying on bilateral loans or IMF financial assistance.
            The analysis included the coherence of the main measures of the economic adjustment programme with
            other EU policies. (233)

            1.5 Qualitative Approach supported by Statistical Evidence



            (230) This entailed evaluating whether measures were relevant in relation to the economic challenges faced by Portugal (design) and
                  whether significant relevant measures were missing from the programme (design).
            (231) This entailed evaluating whether important measures were only included at a later stage (design) or their implementation
                  schedule was not appropriate (design) and whether their implementation was delayed compared to initial plans (outcome).
            (232) In relation to unexpected developments (exogenous factors) and/or results falling short of goals. This implied assessing the
                  extent to which measures led to intended or unexpected consequences.
            (233) Qualitative analysis focused on assessing whether the main measures of the economic adjustment programme were coherent
                  with previous assessments made and whether they were in line with the relevant EU policies - this analysis focused on the main
                  policy fields where co-operation with other DGs had been pursued within the programme framework. It was based on
                  interviews with the officials of other DGs who were involved in the programme context.




146
                                                                                                    1. Evaluation process




The evaluation is primarily qualitative, but strongly supported by statistical evidence. The
evaluation is based on economic judgement, rather than on an econometric analysis of data. While
qualitative analysis considered the possibility of alternative actions, the assessment was not based on
building counter-factual scenarios. The use of a macro economic model is not appropriate in the context
of an ex post evaluation of such a multi-faceted programme due to the exceptional nature of the crisis
(especially in the euro area context of the time) and the importance of the political context and other
unobservable and/or exogenous factors. For these reasons it would not have been practical to use DG
ECFIN's QUEST model for this ex post evaluation. The approach taken allowed a much wider range of
factors to be taken into account, which can deliver conclusions that are more relevant in terms of
institutional learning. To the extent possible, the evaluation is placed back in the context that existed at
the time of the programme, in Portugal and in the euro area in general.

1.6 Strengths and Limitations

The evaluation process has been robust and the data gathered has been reliable. The process has
benefitted from the input of a wide range of relevant skills, expertise and experience – both in the team of
ECFIN economists undertaking the evaluation and in the ISG overseeing the process. In addition, the
evaluation has benefitted from the input of academics and experts who have stress tested and validated
the analysis and provisional findings. A significant volume of relevant and reliable data was available on
which to base the evaluation, including form a wide range of informed stakeholders.

Economic adjustment programmes must be flexible in order to react to both internal and external changes
of economic circumstances, which are bound to be substantial in countries that have requested external
assistance. Uncertainty is also very high and structural changes need to occur in countries experiencing
crises. The quarterly reviews allow close monitoring of the implementation and prompt adaptation of the
different sets of measures to evolving circumstances. There is a continuous loop between design and
implementation which makes a programme a "living body". In this context, considerations about design
and implementation are difficult to disentangle and do not necessarily allow useful conclusions to be
reached.

This evaluation focuses on the initial design of the programme, how conditionality evolved during time,
programme implementation and achieved results. The analysis in the different sections of the report is
structured by distinguishing, to the extent possible, between the original design and the implementation of
the programme. In assessing the original design, the evaluation compares the initial programme with the
key challenges faced by Portugal. In assessing the implementation, the results achieved through the
implementation of specific conditionality – as it has been adapted over the course of the programme – are
analysed. Each section also includes an overall assessment with respect to the objectives of the
programme (Section 1 sets out the intended results and impact within the intervention logic of the
programme). These assessments are complemented by Section 8 where the macroeconomic outcomes and
remaining challenges are analysed. Section 7 focuses on social developments. Drawing for the previous
sections, the overall conclusions (Section 9) are then structured along the evaluation questions and
directly provide replies in terms of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, added value and coherence with
other EU policies of the programme.

The evaluation encountered some limitations, particularly with respect to the non-availability of some
individuals involved in programme design/implementation and the relatively short time since the end of
the programme. This hampers the ability to draw strong conclusions on the sustainability of some
programme's achievements. The programme dates back to 2011; in some cases officials who were
directly involved in its design or in the early stages of its implementation are no longer working for DG
ECFIN. This is also the case for staff of the other institutions and for Portuguese officials. Whenever
possible these officials were called to participate in meetings, despite having moved to other assignments.
The evaluation found out that, for the main issues, their replacements were generally able to provide the
necessary information and assessments.



                                                                                                                      147
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            The fact that this ex post evaluation started one year after the end of the programme represents a
            limitation for making a definitive assessment about the medium-long term objective of return to
            sustainable growth. A number of structural reforms that are crucial on a medium-long term perspective
            and that started under the programme have not yet been finalised, making it difficult to reach concrete
            conclusions on their longer term impacts.

            2. Summary of the targeted stakeholder consultation (responses to written questionnaires)

            A number of bodies that can be expected to have an informed economic understanding of the Portuguese
            programme and the context in which it was implemented were addressed through written questionnaires.
            In this framework, the Ministries of Finances of all EU Member States (MoFs) (234) and a number of
            Portuguese stakeholders were consulted. (235)

            A non-exhaustive and non-specific summary from the replies is reported below. The reference to
            'respondents' or 'stakeholders', 'MoFs' or similar references must not be interpreted as majority, tendency,
            unanimity or necessarily 'more than one'. This summary aims at providing an overview of the main
            controversial assessments mentioned in at least one reply. This is not a statistical exercise based on
            sampling, representativeness and questions with closed answers, so this kind of assessments would be
            inappropriate. (236) Of course, not all suggestions could be reported, but they have duly been taken into
            consideration in the analysis.

            2.1 General on the economic adjustment programme

            According to MoFs, the overall focus of the programme was appropriate, given the challenges that
            brought Portugal to ask for financial assistance. The programme was detailed and flexible enough,
            considering economic developments, political environment and exogenous factors, such as the 2012
            Greek debt crisis. Nevertheless, reference is also made to occasional excessive leniency with respect to
            the fiscal efforts and the speed of structural reforms. Respondents from Portugal (PT respondents) are
            divided about the appropriateness of the overall focus, flexibility and level of detail of the programme.
            When PT respondents express negative assessments about the focus of the programme, this translates into
            remarks about a number of measures included in the programme (see later in this summary) and
            suggestions of other measures that would have been relevant, including measures to maintain/create jobs,
            help transition of the economy from low to high productivity sectors, improve access to finance especially
            for SMEs, support private investment in the tradable sector, encourage entrepreneurship, reform taxation
            and social security systems, introduce a guaranteed minimum income, increase the minimum wage and
            better tackle the SOE's debt overhang.

            PT respondents acknowledge the improvement in public finances, the increase of exports and rebalancing
            of the external accounts, the restoration of confidence and of market access at favourable interest rates.


            (234) A written questionnaire was submitted from the 3rd of November to the 8th of December 2015. 8 Member States sent a written
                  reply.
            (235) A written questionnaire was submitted to 19 Portuguese stakeholders. These stakeholders were: Employers' organisations:
                  Confederação Empresarial de Portugal (CIP), Associação Empresarial de Portugal (AEP), Confederação do Comércio e
                  Serviços de Portugal (CCP), Câmara de Comércio e Indústria Portuguesa (CCIP); Workers' organisations: União Geral de
                  Trabalhadores (UGT), Confederação Geral dos Trabalhadores Portugueses (CGTP-IN); Banking sector: Associação Portuguesa
                  de Bancos (APB); Consumers' organisations: Associação para a Defesa dos Consumidores (DECO); Public authorities:
                  Autoridade da Concorrência (AdC), Conselho das Finanças Publicas, National Energy Regulatory Authority, National
                  Authority for Mobility and Transport (AMT); Charitable organisations: Honra da União das Misericórdias Portuguesas (UMP),
                  Santa Casa da Misericordia, Caritas, Fundação Francisco Manuel dos Santos; Research/academia: Professors of economics in
                  different Portuguese Univesities.
            The written questionnaires were submitted from the 3rd of November 2015 and replies were accepted until the end of the year. Direct
                  contacts were made in order to ensure immediate consideration and maximise the rate of response. In the end, 13 of the above
                  mentioned stakeholders participated to the consultation. Coverage was satisfactory.
            (236) Questions with closed answers are included in the questionnaire to the MoFs, which are a homogeneous population of
                  stakeholders.




148
                                                                                                                            1. Evaluation process




Respondents, including MoFs, acknowledge that the programme (including funding and monitoring)
significantly contributed to the improvement in the investors' confidence and return of Portugal to the
financial markets. This outcome was also supported by the ECB policy and the significant decline of
interest rates at international level, by progress in the banking union and single supervisory mechanism
and by the ownership and commitment of the Portuguese government coupled with flexibility of the EU
partners. Nevertheless, PT respondents also mention that the programme led to unintended consequences,
such as in terms of employment, growth, purchasing power of the middle and lower classes, children
poverty, housing, access to services, credit to the economy and insolvencies. PT respondents are critical
about the short-term perspective of the programme. It is mentioned that the importance of low
productivity and highly debt-dependent activities in the Portuguese GDP growth was underestimated,
while the private sector capacity to adjust to stricter credit conditions, lower public spending and higher
taxes was overestimated. It is reported that the programme should have better communicated the impact
of reforms in the medium-long term and should have been quicker in adjusting the macroeconomic
scenario.

2.2 Fiscal Policy

MoFs assess that fiscal consolidation was appropriate in size and not too frontloaded. When PT
respondents are critical about the excessive intensity and rapid pace of fiscal consolidation, the main
supporting arguments refer to the consequences in terms of economic recession, unemployment,
bankruptcies, loss of high quality jobs, emigration and excessive impact on middle class' income level
and risk of poverty. PT respondents also consider that fiscal multipliers were overoptimistic and the
sensitivity of tax revenues to domestic demand contraction was underestimated. It is mentioned that the
effort should have been spread over a longer period of time to allow for a durable reduction of current
expenditure, while safeguarding productive public investment. The opinion was also mentioned that the
intensity and pace actually followed were the best possible, because as time passed political resistance to
consolidation could be expected to grow.

PT respondents acknowledge that structural (instead of nominal) fiscal targets might make the adjustment
less sharp, but correcting for the cycle is difficult, especially for an unstable economy in need for
structural changes. It is stressed that fiscal consolidation has to go hand in hand with structural reforms. A
scenario with less fiscal consolidation and more structural reforms may even be preferable. It is
mentioned that the programme should have focused on both fewer areas and structural consolidation
measures.

MoFs broadly agree that the composition of fiscal consolidation was appropriate and flanked by an
adequate set of fiscal-structural measures. PT respondents stigmatise the excessive weight of tax-
increasing measures. Nevertheless, it is also mentioned that the share of revenue-based consolidation was
appropriate. On the expenditure side, PT respondents are critical about the emergency (non-structural)
and easily reversible measures adopted during the programme (such as the cuts to wages and pensions)
and the significant cuts to productive public investment(237). It is also mentioned that the reduction in
social transfers was excessive. An effective medium-term spending framework would have contributed to
a consolidation more based on expenditure-reducing measures, with fewer cuts in the short-term, but a
larger reduction in the m/l term, with a positive impact on the economy via less taxes and higher
productivity. The need for the actual implementation of a deep reform of the State is mentioned. In this
area resistance to change was strong and achievements are insufficient. An in-depth comprehensive
spending review and a civil service reform should have been frontloaded.



(237) Nevertheless, given the emphasis on public and SOEs’ investment that preceded the crisis and the improvement in
      infrastructures following EU accession, it is also mentioned that relatively large cuts to capital expenditure were appropriate.
      The opinion is also reported that even more cuts to capital expenditure would have been appropriate to reduce the impact on
      current expenditure. Attention is drawn to the role of current expenditure in fuelling consumption.




                                                                                                                                              149
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Some criticism arises about the tax measures implemented during the programme. It is stated that, with
            the exception of property taxation and CIT reduction(238), the revenue measures included in the
            programme did not consider enough the impact on the economy. The initial focus on indirect taxation
            instead of direct taxes would have been less harsh on the economy, but it had to be abandoned because of
            the need for additional revenue. It is mentioned that the programme did not correct instability and
            complexity of the tax system and the tax hikes introduced during the programme are to be considered
            temporary. The tax base is still limited and tax evasion is still strong. The opinion is also put forward that
            the strong increase in the tax burden on labour (also for lower incomes) was unfair, also in view of the
            concurrent CIT reduction.

            2.3 Fiscal structural measures

            PT respondents are positive with reference to the progress made under the programme on the control of
            expenditure commitments, reporting of fiscal risks, the establishment of an independent fiscal council and
            of a Budget Support Technical Unit. It is mentioned that the overall reform of the fiscal framework and
            public finances management was implemented later than it should have been. The need for accrual-based
            accounting and budgeting systems is still reported. It is mentioned that medium-term targets were
            substantially and frequently changed. The new Budget Framework Law should now reinforce the
            macroeconomic responsibility of the Minister of Finance, while giving line ministries more autonomy and
            responsibility for the management of their programmes. It is reported that the strategy for the settlement
            of arrears was beneficial, even if it could have been accelerated and more attention could have been
            devoted to the underlying dynamics of hospitals' funding.

            It is mentioned that the programme provided for an integrated and consistent approach to reform the
            financial management of local administrations. The progress was weaker at the regional level. It is
            mentioned that, in general, further improvements are needed to strengthen alignment between national
            and local priorities and to ensure strong professionalism in the management of resources. Reference is
            made to problems that remain with respect to numerical fiscal rules (implementation of the new setting
            and frequent annual changes).

            Despite the fact that discussions on the reorganization of public administration started long before the
            programme, PT respondents suggest that more structural progress should have been made in this area. It
            is mentioned that structural transformation was and is still needed. Measures should have been as detailed
            as possible, avoiding repeated postponements. The plan for the reform of the State came too late and it
            was not streamlined and detailed enough (no clear timetables and responsibilities). It is also mentioned
            that, in general, the reform of the State requires a serious social dialogue and should not impact on the
            quality of services to citizens and businesses or on the efficiency of the public administration. When it is
            mentioned that the quality of public services was impacted by expenditure cuts, reference is mainly made
            to the impact on services' proximity.

            PT respondents acknowledge that PPPs re-negotiation allowed savings. The new framework law on PPPs
            and the set-up of a technical unit for project monitoring are considered positive developments. It is
            acknowledged that problems still exist. It is mentioned that re-negotiations may have implied contractual
            changes that may reduce future commitments of private partners and may increase future spending for the
            State.

            PT respondents acknowledge that the measures implemented under the programme improved the
            framework conditions of the SOE-sector and contributed to reduce contingent liabilities. A number of
            privatisations took place and restructuring plans were implemented in several SOEs, allowing for better
            operating performance. It is also acknowledged that problems still exist. It is mentioned that important

            (238) Nevertheless, it is also mentioned that the CIT reduction may favour the low-productive non-tradable sector, while efforts
                  should focus on exporting firms.




150
                                                                                                       1. Evaluation process




structural decisions seem to be still needed and cuts that improved performance can be reversed.
Privatisations alone are not likely to solve SOEs' difficulties, because the public tend to consider these
firms as a public concern and this gives a strong bargaining position to the private shareholders relative to
the State. It is highlighted that costly contingent liabilities are still related to "swaps" that have been
submitted to the judgment of the competent Courts. The opinion also emerged that expenditure savings
should not be the leading factor in making decisions about the involvement of the State in companies that
can be key tools for intervention in strategic sectors of the economy.

PT respondents mention that privatisations helped reducing the weight of the State in the economy,
reducing public debt, were successful in attracting foreign capital and contributed to improve competition
and quality of services in specific sectors. Nevertheless, it is also reported that the process was led more
by the urgent need to reduce debt (in a period of financial distress) rather than by a clear strategy about
which sectors should be entrusted to the private initiative, also considering the inflow of foreign capital. It
is also mentioned that privatisation of public services should have been decided in the context of an
effective social dialogue, including for the purpose of maintaining jobs and ensuring quality, access and
appropriate costs of services. It is highlighted that more could have been done for the sale of properties of
local and regional administrations and, in some cases, for earlier privatisations of public transport
companies.

PT respondents are positive about the reform of revenue administration. It is reported that greater priority
could have been given to the relation with tax-payers and to reducing the administrative burden for
companies. PT respondents stress that tax cases above €1 million have not been significantly accelerated
and that the tax and social security administrations have not been merged.

PT respondents are critical about the measures to reduce the public wage bill. Respondents acknowledge
that staff of the central administration has been reduced (to a lesser extent at local level). For the purpose
of reducing staff, limiting admissions is important, but a balanced approach for the renewal of available
skills should be considered. It is mentioned that measures did not properly address problems in terms of
structure of the public sector wages (including differentiation according to responsibility, expertise and
performance), recruitment, mobility and career expectations. It is reported that the public sector has
difficulties in attracting and retaining people with the necessary skills. This weakens the capability of
public administrations and may have increased the need for external technical advice. The issue of
remunerations is particularly controversial. It is reported that there is a public wage premium for less
skilled occupations, while the relatively higher cuts on higher wages contributed to the loss of the most
qualified employees. Nevertheless, it is also mentioned that in general the wage premium has been
reduced. The opinions also emerged that corrections to public wages should be part of a proper
negotiation process and that wages in the public sectors should be based on a different rational than in the
private sector.

Concerning pension expenditure, PT respondents are critical about the temporary, emergency nature of
the adopted measures and the absence of a proper structural reform to ensure sustainability and equity. It
is also mentioned that cuts should have been more selective and focused on the highest pensions. It is
suggested that cuts in pensions should have been subject to social dialogue.

PT respondents acknowledge that the inefficiency of the health system required intervention and that the
programme contributed to the reduction of its costs. In particular, the reduction of public spending in
pharmaceutical products is acknowledged as a positive development as well as the rationalisation of the
health services network. There are concerns about the temporary nature of some savings and the need for
further structural changes, for example regarding the hospital restructuring. The opinion that the
programme measures have worsened access to health services for significant parts of the population also
emerged. Nevertheless, it is also mentioned that changes were implemented without a significant drop in
the quality or interruption of services.




                                                                                                                         151
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            2.4 Financial sector measures

            MoFs are positive or neutral about the health and viability of the financial sector, and they consider that
            conditionality concerning the financial sector was properly designed and implemented.

            Also PT respondents make reference to progress in the restoration of health and viability of the financial
            sector. Nevertheless, it is also mentioned that at the end of the programme there were still serious cases of
            weak financial institutions, while the system had not been restructured as it should have been. It is
            reported that, in general, financial institutions' leverage, funding, solvency and efficiency improved. In
            the context of an economic upswing in its early stages, profitability is still low, mainly due to the high
            volume of NPLs, low interest rates and high private indebtedness. It is mentioned that the availability of €
            12 billion for recapitalisation was important to restore confidence in the banking system. The onerous
            conditions of the CoCos are highlighted. This had an impact on the financial institutions' performance and
            created incentives to repayments/capital increases in an unfavourable economic and financial context.

            It is mentioned that the deleveraging of the financial sector should have been slower. Reference is made
            to insufficient bank financing to the economy, in particular SMEs and households. Nevertheless, it is also
            reported that the relative weight of lending to exporting firms increased. It is mentioned that the
            programme should have focused on the development of financial instruments alternative to bank
            financing, particularly for SMEs. The opinion emerged that credit shortage contributed to insolvencies
            that could have been avoided.

            PT respondents are critical about the outcome in terms of reduction of NPLs and private sector
            indebtedness. It is mentioned that the schemes for non-judicial restructuring of corporate debt (PER and
            SIREVE) were revised, but at a late stage. It is acknowledged that PER has been successful, but the
            restructuring process is slow. Additional changes to the rules on recovery of claims by the State would
            have been warranted, as the tax authorities challenge the businesses' recovery plans. No specific
            mechanisms have been created to support personal insolvencies. It is mentioned that the less favourable
            tax treatment will contribute to contain private indebtedness in the future.

            Reference is made to the measures that have been implemented to strengthen the banking supervision and
            resolution framework. PT respondents mention that at first the programme concentrated on liquidity and
            deleveraging issues, but not sufficiently on the structural weaknesses of the banks' balance sheets, linked
            to a large extent to those of the economy.

            2.5 Structural reforms

            MoFs are of the opinion that the structural reforms in the programme covered the major elements to
            address long-standing structural weakness of the Portuguese economy, in particular in terms of
            competitiveness. It is mentioned that the level of public and private debt is still high. On the adequacy of
            the programme in addressing long-standing structural weaknesses, PT respondent are divided. It is
            mentioned that there should have been clearer communication about the necessity of structural reforms to
            underpin future growth and competitiveness and about the logic of the interaction between the different
            reforms. The criticism arises that structural reforms were too much focused on raising competitiveness
            through wage cuts and labour deregulation, but other essential measures were missing, including policies
            to promote research and innovation, renewable energies, workers' qualifications and skills, liberalisation
            of some markets, a reindustrialisation plan and further productivity-enhancing investment.

            MoFs broadly agree that the pace and sequencing of reforms were appropriate. It is mentioned that the
            pace of reforms should be maintained and the effective implementation stepped up. In view of PT
            stakeholders, structural reforms should have been more frontloaded and the pace of implementation
            accelerated. There were delays and deficit of implementation in some reforms, such as the measures to




152
                                                                                                   1. Evaluation process




reduce rents in the energy sector so as to curb the high energy prices, which heavily weigh on Portuguese
companies' competitiveness.

Regarding the outcome of structural reforms, opinions are divided. It is mentioned that some
improvements are merely on paper (such as about competitiveness), while in other areas the programme
was successful as marked, for example, by a return to growth and the correction of economic imbalances
(e.g. current account and public finances). The economic outlook remains fragile. Structural reforms
should remain top in the policy agenda. There is also a need to better evaluate the quality and impact of
these reforms, their enforcement and the way they are financed. Attention is drawn to the latest IMF Art
IV report showing that companies perceive labour market reforms as having had more impact on the
reduction of production costs than product market reforms.

On labour market reforms: PT respondents both support and oppose the reforms to employment
protection legislation for workers with permanent contracts. It is acknowledged that, because of
uncertainty and depressed economic conditions, employers still tend to prefer temporary or fixed term
contracts, but after a while some of them are converted into permanent ones. The number of permanent
contracts is increasing. Nevertheless, the opinion is also reported that these measures did not bring about
the expected improvements in terms of employment and reduced segmentation.

PT respondents are divided also about the measures taken to address benefit traps and incentivise return
to employment. When the direction is assessed as appropriate, further progress is deemed necessary. The
criticisms arises that cutting social benefits when labour demand is scarce results into less social
protection for the most vulnerable with no improvement in employment. More attention is called for jobs'
quality. No respondents think that the programme should have envisaged a cut in the minimum wage,
due to the negative implications for in-work poverty, the political impossibility of implementing such
measures or because it is productivity not wages that are the issue. It is mentioned that the measures to
improve employment programmes have been beneficial, but also that further progress is needed.

PT respondents who think that the 'fiscal devaluation' measure (shifting the tax burden away from
employer social insurance contributions) envisaged in the original programme should not have been
implemented provide two main reasons: it would have placed an unfair burden on employees, and, in a
wider perspective, struggling for price competitiveness through this type of measures was not the best
way forward. PT respondents who support fiscal devaluation consider that it has the potential to facilitate
restructuring of the economy in the short term. It is also mentioned that that poor design and presentation
of the "fiscal devaluation" proposal was a major reason why it was not ultimately implemented.

PT respondents agree that improving low skills levels, cutting early school leaving and improving the
relevance and quality of training provision are critical challenges for Portugal. It is mentioned that
Portugal's early school leaving rate has fallen significantly, but still remains high. There are differing
views on whether the measures in the programme were appropriate or would prove to have been effective.
The respondents who are more positive on the contribution of programme measures to tackling Portugal's
skills gap stress that there is still more to do. The doubt is also expressed as to whether to date the
Portuguese authorities have committed to real reform to improve the skills of employed people. It is
suggested that further measures should be taken to tackle the skills' gap.

On product market reforms: PT respondents acknowledge that the programme contained significant
reforms of goods and services markets to remove restrictions to competition and reduce prices, but many
of them often experienced delays, insufficient implementation and have delivered limited results for
business and consumers so far. Vested interested in some industries remain and maintain their
considerable influence.

PT respondents consider that liberalized supply of natural gas increased significantly, however prices
have not become more competitive compared to EU prices. In the electricity sector, the impact of



                                                                                                                     153
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            liberalization in terms of prices has been mild. Electricity prices have actually increased between 2011
            and 2015, while the overall tariff debt increased by € 3.3 billion in that period. In the telecommunications
            sector all the measures foreseen in the Memorandum were adopted, but it is difficult to assess their impact
            on competition and prices. Also in the postal sector the programme measures were implemented, but in
            spite of liberalization of the market, there is still no competition for standard post delivery services, to the
            detriment of consumers. In the transport sector, most but not all programme measures were implemented
            and there were delays. Reforms in the ports system allowed some decrease of port operating costs, but the
            pass-through to port users is hampered by the non-renegotiation of existing port concessions. The new
            horizontal law on regulated professions was successfully implemented, although further actions to
            increase competition would be warranted.

            PT respondents argue that progress in the reform of the judicial system was insufficient, as judicial
            procedures are still very slow and expensive, and inefficiency of the judicial system is quoted as one of
            the main factors discouraging investment in Portugal. The competition enforcement was reinforced during
            the programme with regard to institutional and legislative aspects and respondents consider that the
            reforms brought significant improvements. It is reported that the programme measures to improve public
            procurement processes increased publicity and transparency, although specific measures to further
            facilitate SMEs access would have been warranted. It is also mentioned that excessive centralisation is
            not the way to improve public procurement. It is noted that measures to improve the business
            environment allowed Portugal to move higher in international competitiveness rankings, but they have
            had limited impact on daily activities of Portuguese companies. PT respondents are broadly positive on
            the long-awaited reforms of the housing market aimed at increasing the offer in the rental market, also for
            its social impact as they allowed families to afford a home without further getting indebted.

            2.6 Social impact

            PT respondents consider that the burden of the adjustment has not been evenly distributed across the
            Portuguese society, with the middle and low strata of the population bearing most of the costs. It is
            mentioned that pensioners, civil servants and the most vulnerable were particularly penalised as a result
            of the significant cuts in pensions, public wages and social transfers (such as unemployment benefits). It
            is also deemed that austerity policies were felt in the budgets of social functions of the State such as
            health, education and social protection, hampering access of the population to these services.
            Furthermore, it is mentioned that the tax increases during the programme have fallen disproportionately
            more on the middle and lower income households. PT respondents criticize that the programme did not
            propose solutions to face the inevitable social consequences of the sharp recession. Nevertheless, it is also
            mentioned that measures were designed to protect minimum income standards, including updating basic
            pensions and the widespread application of means-testing.

            Social outcomes of the adjustment mentioned by PT stakeholders include the drop in purchasing power of
            families, rising risk of poverty and social exclusion, worsening inequalities and higher than expected
            unemployment, which led many people to emigrate. The emigration of qualified staff is very negatively
            assessed for being very costly to Portugal.

            Concerning social support expenditure, it is mentioned that programme measures focused on enabling
            short-term financial savings, but did not deliver a proper rationalisation of the welfare system.

            The criticism arises about the lack of real social dialogue underpinning the programme, as the opinion of
            social partners had no material influence in the configuration of the programme measures. PT respondents
            mention that the programme should have benefited from more social dialogue and should have been more
            in line with the tripartite agreements for competitiveness and employment signed in March 2011 and
            January 2012. Nevertheless, the notable social peace experienced throughout the whole period is
            acknowledged.




154
                                                                                                    1. Evaluation process




2.7 Amount and terms of the financial assistance

According to MoFs, the amount of financial assistance provided to Portugal was appropriate. The
relatively large cash buffer at the end of the programme allowed investors to be confident in the ability of
Portugal to withstand market volatility without funding pressure, which in turn eased market access.

MoFs consider that easing the lending terms of EU loans proved beneficial, supporting investment
confidence through two channels: direct impact on fiscal sustainability and signalling effect that EU
partners were ready to help government's commitment to implementing the programme. The frontloaded
disbursement schedule and the earmarking of funds for banking recapitalisation are deemed appropriate.

2.8 Ownership and added value

Most of MoFs agree that the level of ownership of the programme by the Portuguese authorities and their
level of commitment to effective programme implementation were satisfactory.

MoFs are of the opinion that European institutions' involvement added value to the achievement of the
programme's objective as it added expertise and a European/international perspective to programme
design; added to the credibility of the adjustment and allowed the adjustment to be implemented flexibly
when needed; ensured coherence with other EU policies; allowed a bigger financial envelope and lower
costs of financing.




                                                                                                                      155
      ANNEX 2
      The Portuguese Authorities' views on the ex post evaluation

      1. Introduction

      The Portuguese authorities take note of the Ex-Post Evaluation (EPE) Report prepared by the European
      Commission (EC). This exercise, although focused on the EC’s role, must also bear in mind the parts
      played by the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund, in view of the three entities’
      joint interaction with the Portuguese authorities.

      The EC concludes that the Portuguese Programme was a “relative success”. The Portuguese authorities
      welcome a more balanced view from the EC than the one expressed by the IMF in its Ex-Post Evaluation
      of the Programme. The Commission does point out to successes and insufficiencies of the Programme in
      a more open and constructive way. The Programme was successful in restoring market access and in
      generating a primary surplus. However, additional efforts are still required to stabilize the financial sector
      and to overcome structural bottlenecks. In its 2016 Country Report for Portugal, the EC clearly identifies
      those economic constraints, which hinder competitiveness, prosperity and social cohesion. As important
      as analysing metrics of the Programme, one should also take a closer look at its social spill-over effects
      and its monitoring, as the Commission does, since these help to understand the citizens’ adherence to the
      measures.

      Understanding drawbacks helps stakeholders to identify areas where action is still needed and to better
      design policy answers.

      2. Weak growth and rising debt

      One of the main goals of the Programme was to set the economy on a stronger medium-term growth path.

      Since joining the European Union in 1986 Portugal has made enormous progress in economic and social
      indicators, largely closing the development gap with its European partners. During the 1990s the
      Portuguese economy converged with its EU partners. However, since joining the Euro, Portugal
      registered low growth intertwined with recession periods. As the report states, “the Portuguese crisis
      mainly resulted from a combination of poor economic performance and lack of competitiveness on the
      years preceding the crisis and unsustainable public finances”. Poor economic performance led to the
      accumulation of external imbalances, with private and public debt levels increasing significantly and
      reaching unsustainable heights. The economy’s resilience in face of a crisis was, therefore, strongly
      affected and Portugal had to request external financial assistance in April 2011, after the government’s
      resignation following parliamentary rejection of a stability programme aimed at strengthening the fiscal
      position.

      Such being the background, and from a formal point of view, one could hardly expect that a three-year
      Programme might have implemented the economic overhaul needed to boost competitiveness in a
      recessive environment. There was an over-optimism in target setting. Even reforms that were
      implemented during the Programme – for instance a comprehensive programme for corporate
      deleveraging (e.g. created SIREVE as an out of court procedure for debt restructuring, made changes to
      the insolvency framework and launched the PER) – will take time to produce effects. With the benefit of
      hindsight, these reforms will need to be fine-tuned and complemented. Programme Capitalizar, for
      instance, is targeted to fill-in a legacy issue from the Programme regarding the capitalization of firms.

      From a substantial point of view, since the strategy was to adjust through the reduction of labour costs, in
      the hope of attaining quick competitiveness gains, one could argue that this fails to take into account the
      transformation of the Portuguese economy in the last two decades and to promote a sustainable
      development model for the future. Portuguese exports increased their weight on GDP from 34.3% in 2011
      to 40.1% in 2014, driven by gains both in the extensive and intensive margins: the number of exporters
      increased by more than 20% between 2010 and 2013 and the share of exports on turnover also increased.
      Sizeable market share gains recorded in recent years were paired by gains in the terms of trade (export



156
                                                                  2. The Portuguese Authorities' views on the ex post evaluation




prices outpacing import prices), revealing a significant improvement in non-price competitiveness of the
Portuguese economy. The path to be encouraged would be further added-value, not simply cost-
competiveness.

Even considering that internal devaluation takes time, the political and social consequences of that
approach must be recognized. The Portuguese authorities welcome the lesson presented by the EC stating
that programme measures should be shaped to take equity and social considerations into account, aiming
at progressive burden-sharing and protection of the most vulnerable. This was not done in a
comprehensive and sustainable way during the programme.

The labour cost-adjustment strategy proposed within the context of a monetary union led to a massive
outflow of the labour force. Estimates vary and, according to independent studies, roughly 400.000
Portuguese left the country during the crisis, out of a population of 10.6 million in 2010 – more than the
estimates put forward by the OECD. It is unanimous that emigration of qualified staff was very high. The
Commission rightly points out that “the emigration of qualified staff is very negatively assessed for being
very costly to Portugal.” The emigration phenomenon was a direct product of the crisis and, probably, a
by-product of the adjustment. This phenomenon is paramount to understand the lack of social adherence
to the proposed adjustment. This legacy cost has to be overcome. The country has to create the conditions
to promote the return of these workers.

Further thought is needed in order to better understand economic reform implementation during
recessions, as well as the political and social impact of those changes. More time is needed to implement
a broader reform agenda. Greater understanding of past reform efforts, made before the Programme, as
well as convergence objectives with the EU, would contribute to better frame efforts that must be
continuous. In this aspect the authorities highlight the analysis of the EC when stating that the “ground for
labour market reforms was better prepared as already agreed with the social partners in March 2011”,
before the signing of the programme MoU in May 2011. Labour market reforms were precisely one of the
areas where the Commission found the reform implementation more successful. One can conclude that
the reform impetus can derive also from domestic will and from social consensus – something the report
consistently downplays. This is paramount to promote ownership and understanding of the reforms. For
this very reason the ongoing reforms, which build on efforts made in the past, are being discussed with
Social Partners.

3. Financing needs

In May 2011, Portugal signed an agreement with European entities and the International Monetary Fund
in order to fulfil its financing needs, as the sovereign was not able to maintain access to market financing
under sustainable conditions. During the programme, Portugal managed to build up a significant cash
buffer in order to increase its financing resilience to short term challenges.

Portugal managed to successfully complete 11 quarterly reviews and to return earlier than expected to
markets. The restoration of access to markets cannot be the only measure to evaluate the success of the
Programme. In order to obtain permanent and stable access to financing structural challenges need to be
addressed. The National Reforms Programme renovates the commitments towards reform
implementation.

4. Fiscal policy

The Commission argues that the Programme was set-up to tackle “broad-based economic inefficiencies”
and hence envisaged actions in several areas. It is however undeniable that a clear priority was given to
recover and stabilize the fiscal situation.




                                                                                                                             157
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            From the onset of the Programme, there was a sense that public accounts were at the centre of the crisis
            and, in the preceding years, Portugal had ran large deficits, breaching the 3% goal of the Stability and
            Growth Pact and accumulating an excessive and fast-growing public debt (compounded, in terms of
            public perception, be the gradual enlargement of its perimeter, encompassing layers that were not
            previously considered under the official definition of public debt).

            Although a huge effort concerning the public accounts was required and implemented through a
            significant adjustment process, at the end of the adjustment programme several challenges remained, as
            goals had largely been set in a somewhat unrealistic way, leading to the recurrent amendment of fiscal
            targets. The EC also recognizes this.

            In 2012 the target was -4.5% and the deficit was -5.7%; in 2013 the target was -3.0% whilst the outcome
            was -4.8%; in 2014 the target was -2.3% and the deficit reached -7.2%. Moreover, public debt rose from
            96% in 2010 to 130% in 2014, above the programme target of 115%.

            The proposed pace of adjustment seemed over-ambitious. Although the political line, centred on the 3%
            target, might have been beneficial to generate confidence, in practical terms goals must be set
            realistically.

            In the public sector, a severe set of cost-cutting measures was applied. Nevertheless, contingency
            measures – such as the extraordinary cut in wages and pensions – should always be taken as temporary.
            Only then can they be understood by the public and find legal ground under the Portuguese Constitution.

            The EC rightly points out that the structural reforms’ “full effects will only appear in the medium-to long
            term”. The authorities agree with the assessment. Some of the reforms started during the Programme –
            such as the new Budgetary Law, which is being implemented, the renegotiation of PPPs or the control of
            SOEs – take longer to yield effects. These must continue to be pursued beyond the end of the Programme.

            5. Structural reforms

            During the three-year adjustment Programme, Portugal took action to address its structural bottlenecks.
            Indeed, a large number of reform measures were implemented during this period, covering many reform
            areas such as the labour market, the product markets, the judicial system, education and fiscal structural
            reforms. While the report recognizes the progress achieved, it argues that in some cases the reforms
            undertaken fell short of what was needed, such as in the markets products. Also, the report argues that in
            some areas there is no evidence of positive results and cautions against reform fatigue. The authorities
            agree with the EC that a greater prioritisation of reform would have been positive to reinforce ownership.

            The Portuguese authorities would like to comment on this assessment from three angles: the first refers to
            the results, the second to the focus and the third to the process.

            Results

            Concerning results, it is important to stress that structural reforms, by their very nature, are not expected
            to have positive short-term effects (at least to their full extent), and so there are limits to what a three-year
            programme can actually achieve within its timeframe. A proper assessment of the effects induced by
            reforms can only be done in a longer horizon, when the economy manages to fully adjust.

            In any case, the visible signs are encouraging in a number of areas. To quote only some examples,
            Portugal ranks 13th (out of 189 economies) in the Starting a Business indicator of the World Bank,
            having climbed 11 positions in comparison with 2010; the same is true for the Resolving Insolvency
            indicator, where Portugal moved from 20th in 2010 to 8th in 2016; concerning Product Markets Reforms,
            and according to the latest information by the OECD, Portugal is ranked 12th among 33 OECD countries



158
                                                                  2. The Portuguese Authorities' views on the ex post evaluation




(up by 14 positions in comparison with 2008). Even concerning educational policies, where shifts take
longer, Portugal made progress, with the share of early leavers from education and training decreasing
from 28.3% in 2010 to 13.7% in 2015.

Although important, these results do not tell us what the effects of reforms in the economy were.
However, existing evidence shows that structural reforms in the various areas selected are impacting
positively the productivity growth of the best performing firms, which in turn impacts positively the
productivity growth of the other firms through a process of catching-up.

The reforms implemented first were those with larger potential gains or for which implementation was
easier. Thus, it is natural that the subsequent reforms took longer to be in place or have less incremental
gains. In addition, and in the face of such a high number of structural reforms, national authorities need to
assess carefully the reforms implemented in order to fine-tune them and to better design new reforms.
Although time consuming, this step is crucial to ensure the quality of the reform process. These elements
cannot be taken as reform fatigue but simply as a consequence of the process of implementing such an
ambitious agenda.

Despite the progress achieved, the reform agenda − in Portugal as in any other country − is never a
concluded process and a three-year programme could not be expected to allow for the implementation of
all needed reforms without endangering ownership of the process or overstretching administrative
capacity.

Focus

A main bottleneck of the Programme’s design concerns the social dimension of the reform process, which
was not duly accounted for. Social fairness, and its perception, must be core in any reform programme,
ensuring adequate protection for the most disadvantaged. The economic models on which most of the
impact assessment was done do not allow for an evaluation of distributional considerations; therefore, the
European Commission, together with national authorities, should aim at a more fit-for-purpose toolkit
going forward.

In addition, the Programme’s focus on cost competitiveness measures was not appropriate, as a sustained
structural adjustment should aim at non-cost competitiveness gains, with a focus on skills and innovation,
two of the key areas in the current National Reforms Programme.

Process

There are a number of procedural issues that could have been better tackled and that should be kept as
lessons for the future. In particular, the timing of reforms implemented during the Programme was not
always optimal. Indeed, some studies show that specific reforms should not be taken in an economic
downturn and that there are important sequencing and complementarity issues that need to be considered
while setting the reform agenda, as they have a sizeable impact in the final results. Based on a strong
quantitative assessment, an effective reform programme should maximize potential gains, while duly
taking into account short-term costs, the effects of the cycle and distributional concerns. High short-term
costs, on top of having important fairness considerations, harm the sustainability of the reform process,
endangering ownership and support. A well communicated reform agenda – one of the lessons pointed-
out by the EC - , with a clear identification of potential benefits, ensures ownership and therefore allows
for a proper sequencing and bundling of reform measures, not only from a technical but also from a social
and political point of view. Ultimately, this will allow for a more efficient, effective and equitable reform
process.




                                                                                                                             159
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            6. Banking sector policies

            The Portuguese banking system went through a significant adjustment process. For instance, the
            Programme helped to provide the conditions to regain market access and deposits remained resilient.
            However, at the end of the Adjustment Programme several challenges remained.

            A fair assessment needs to consider the specific context of the Programme’s design and implementation,
            while aiming for a balanced view of achievements and challenges. In particular, the unprecedented
            difficulties of the sovereign debt crisis need to be accounted for, as uncertainty and market volatility
            spiked in the absence of an established crisis management framework in the context of a monetary union.
            Consequently, although ex post assessments are necessarily made with the benefit of hindsight, this does
            not replace the consideration of a credible counterfactual which, as referred in the report, is not possible
            to construct.

            In more practical terms, it is important to stress that only half of the EUR 12 billion of the Bank Solvency
            Support Facility were used. The situation of Banco Espírito Santo, to which a resolution was applied
            shortly after the end of the Programme, and of Banif further eroded public confidence in the Programme
            outcomes in this area.

            Despite some positive signals observed more recently (in terms, for instance, of the banks’ financing
            structure and of firms’ deleveraging), the adjustment of the banking sector is still ongoing and some
            significant challenges persist, notably regarding their profitability and the high stock of Non-Performing
            Loans (NPL).

            The turnaround in the liquidity profile of Portuguese banks is one of the most prominent features of their
            adjustment. Concerns resulting from the resolution measures applied to Portuguese banks did not have
            any impact on the retail deposit base of the banking system, thus providing evidence of the public’s
            confidence in the system as a whole.

            The Portuguese banking system also had some singularities: i) it was able to generate considerable gains
            during the first years of the crisis thanks to emerging markets; and ii) it benefited from having a large
            state-owned bank that functioned as guarantor of the system by absorbing deposits.

            An assessment of the implementation of banking sector policies should always consider the evolving
            nature of prudential regulation and supervision, especially given the intensive reform agenda pursued in
            the aftermath of the international financial crisis. Supervisory action throughout the programme duly
            reflected these developments at a global level, becoming more intrusive, pro-active and forward-looking
            towards the banks’ risk profile. The Portuguese authorities’ adaptation to this changing environment, in
            constant interaction and collaboration with the EC and the other institutions, should be underscored.

            7. Main macroeconomic outcomes and remaining challenges

            Given that one of the main goals of the Programme was to enhance medium-to-long term growth it is
            important to highlight that, as the EC acknowledges, “in the context of a worse than expected
            recessionary environment in the EU, growth resumed later than foreseen and only after a larger-than-
            expected contraction”. Real GDP is 4.5% lower in 2015 than in 2010.

            Programme-design could not anticipate all the consequences of the proposed adjustment and could not
            adapt its course over its limited three-year period. The Programme itself proved also to be far too
            optimistic regarding economic recovery in view of its strong contractionary approach. Important
            challenges thus remain.




160
                                                                  2. The Portuguese Authorities' views on the ex post evaluation




One of the main early macroeconomic accomplishments of the Programme was the swift external
adjustment achieved. Positive results were seen regarding external trade, but the recovery only truly
began when domestic demand resumed, which was delayed by the contractionary approach of the
programme, with its focus on a relatively fast pace of fiscal consolidation and public debt stabilization.

Both public and private investment decreases had a strong negative impact on economic growth, which
cannot be “mitigated by the high level of public investment in the years preceding the crisis” as the report
states.

Labour market improvements after 2013 cannot be dissociated from the strong emigration outflow,
namely regarding young highly qualified people, which cannot be seen as a success.

Several structural reforms launched under the Programme are being implemented – and should continue
to be so (frequently with sound results becoming visible only in a medium-to-long-term horizon) – but
did not manage to remove a number of considerable risks regarding the Portuguese economy, such as
product markets’ bottlenecks, high indebtedness of non-financial corporations, banking sector fragility,
high public debt levels and public sector inefficiency, that still affect external competitiveness and the
recovery of growth. This diagnosis is the basis of the National Reform Programme (NRP).

Reform efforts are necessarily a continuous process. In this context, the current National Reforms
Programme (NRP) departs from that evaluation and presents an ambitious reform programme with
concrete measures tackling the main challenges that the economy still faces (and as also identified by the
European Commission in its 2016 Country Report for Portugal). Doing so the NRP already takes on
board one of the lessons of the Adjustment Programme as presented by the EC: to set clear priorities and
to communicate effectively, in order to increase ownership. The main reform areas are thus skills,
innovation, firms’ capitalization, modernisation of the public administration, qualification of the territory
and social cohesion and equity. The ambition of reform measures in the NRP provides a clear sign that
the authorities remain determined to tackle the lingering bottlenecks of the Portuguese economy.

8. Conclusions

Overall, even if the Programme was successful in restoring market access and generating primary
surpluses, important challenges remain, particularly in the financial sector and in overcoming structural
bottlenecks. The Programme has once again proved that the implementation of reforms should not be
seen as an isolated act. Instead, policy stakeholders must focus on implementing reforms as a continuous
process. Portugal will carry on pursuing reforms to foster economic competitiveness and social inclusion.
This reform effort is comprehensively detailed in the National Reform Programme, which departs from an
evaluation of reforms, identifies six priority areas and sets a clear timetable as well as goals.

The Portuguese authorities would like to highlight the commitment shown by the EC staff throughout the
duration of the Programme, as well as their efforts to constructively engage with other partners. Portugal
remains committed to deepening the dialogue and promoting a closer mutual understanding with the EC
within the framework of the Post-Programme Surveillance Missions.




                                                                                                                             161
      REFERENCES

      This Section includes sources that are mentioned in the report and other sources that have been used for
      the ex post evaluation.

      Almeida, V., Castro, G., Mourinho Felix, R., Maria, J. R. (2011), "Fiscal consolidation in a small Euro-
      area economy", Bank of Portugal Economic Bulletin, Spring

      Andrews, D., Caldera Sánchez, A. and Johansson, Å. (2011), “Housing Markets and Structural Policies
      in OECD Countries”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 836, OECD Publishing

      Antunes, A., Martinho, R. (2012), "Access to credit by non-financial firms", Banco de Portugal Financial
      Stability Report, pages 159-176, May 2012

      Arnold, J., Nicoletti, G. and Scarpetta, S. (2011), “Regulation, resources allocation and productivity
      growth”, EIB Papers, Vol. 16, No. 1, European Investment Bank, Luxembourg.

      Arnold, J. (2015), "Boosting export performance in Portugal", OECD Economics Department Working
      Paper No. 1257, OECD Publishing, Paris

      Arnold, J., Barbosa, N. (2015), "Structural policies and productivity: Evidence from Portuguese firms",
      OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1259, OECD Publishing, Paris

      Arnold, J., Farinha Rodrigues, C. (2015), "Reducing inequality and poverty in Portugal", OECD
      Economics Department Working Paper No. 1258, OECD Publishing, Paris

      Avram, S., Figari, F., Leventi, Ch., Levy, H., Navicke, J., Matsaganis, M., Militaru, E., Paulus, A.,
      Rastringina, O., Sutherland, H. (2013), "The Distributional Effects of Fiscal Consolidation in Nine
      Countries", EUROMOD Working Paper No. EM 2/13

      Augusto, F., Félix, S. (2014), "The impact of bank recapitalization on firms' access to credit: evidence
      from Portugal", Banco de Portugal

      Barbosa, E., Pereira, S., Brandao, E. (2013), "The Shadow Economy in Portugal: An Analysis Using the
      MIMIC Model", FEP Working Paper, No 514

      Barisitz, S. (2013), "Nonperforming Loans in Western Europe – A Selective Comparison of Countries and
      National Definitions", in Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Focus on European Economic Integration,
      Q1/2013

      Barrel, R. Holland, D., Hurst, I. (2012), "Fiscal multipliers and prospects for consolidation", OECD
      Journal: Economic Studies, Vol. 2012/1.

      Blanchard, O. (2006), "Adjustment within the euro. The difficult case of Portugal", Springer

      Blanchard, O., Giavazzi, F. (2003), "Macroeconomic effects of regulation and deregulation in goods and
      labour markets", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118

      Braguinsky, S., Branstetter, L. G. and Regateiro, A., (2011), “The incredible shrinking Portuguese firm”,
      NBER Working Paper 17265, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

      Carneiro A., Portugal P., Varejão J., (2013), "Catastrophic job destruction", Banco de Portugal Working
      Papers, 14/2013




162
                                                                                                              References




Caruana, J., Van Rixtel, A. (2012), “Mercados financieros internacionales y financiación bancaria en la
zona del euro: dinámica y participantes”, Economistas, 2012

Confidencial Imobiliário, RICS (2015), "Portuguese Housing Market Survey", Monthly reports 2015

Correia, A.L., Gouveia, A.F., (2016), "What determines firm-level export capacity? Evidence from
Portuguese firms", GEE Papers No. 57, April 2016

Corsetti, G., Meier, A., Müller, G.J. (2012), "What determines Government spending multipliers?", IMF
Working Paper, WP/12/150

Crosignani, M., Faria-e-Castro, M., Fonseca, L. (2015), "The Portuguese Banking System during the
Sovereign Debt Crisis", Banco de Portugal Economic Studies 1 (2), pages 43-80

De Castro F., Salto M. and Steiner H. (2013), "The gap between public and private wages: new evidence
for the EU". DG ECFIN, European Economy, Economic Papers 508/2013

Deroose, S., Hodson, D., Kuhlmann, J. (2008), "The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines: Before and
After the Re-launch of the Lisbon Strategy", JCMS 2008, Volume 46, Number 4, pp. 827–848

Dias, D., Marques, C. R., Martins F. (2013), "Wage rigidity and employment adjustment at the firm level:
Evidence from survey data", Labour Economics, Elsevier, 23C, 40–49

Dias, D., Marques, C. R., Richmond, C., (2014), “Misallocation and productivity in the lead up to the
Eurozone crisis”, Working Paper n.º 11, Banco de Portugal

Dickens W. T., Goette L., Groshen E. L., Holden S., Messina J., Schweitzer M. E., Turunen J., Ward M.
E. (2007), "How wages change: micro evidence from the International Wage Flexibility Project", Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 195-214

Duval, R., Furceri, D. (2016), "Time for a supply side book? Macroeconomic effects of labor and product
market reforms in advanced economies", IMF WEO April 2016.

Farinha, L., Felix S., (2014), "Credit Rationing for Portuguese SMEs", Financial Stability Papers, Banco
de Portugal

Felke, R., Eide, S. (2014), "Export-Driven Adjustment in Portugal", Intereconomics, May 2014, Vol. 49,
Issue 3, pages 170-178.

Figari, F., Paulus, A., Sutherland, H. (2015), "The design of fiscal consolidation measures in the
European Union: Distributional effects and implications for macroeconomic recovery", EUROMOD
Working Paper Series, EM 5/15

Giavazzi, F., Spaventa, L. (2010), "Why the current account may matter in a monetary union: Lessons
from the financial crisis in the Euro area", CEPR Discussion Papers 8008

Giordano, R., Depalo, D., Coutinho Pereira, M., Eugène, B., Papapetrou, E., Perez, J., Reiss, L., Roter, M.
(2011), "The Public Sector Pay Gap in a Selection of Euro Area Countries", ECB Working Paper No
1406, December 2011

Hallett, M, (2016), "What is the evidence for EU Member States on spillovers of minimum wage increases
to other wages?", European Commission, 2016.




                                                                                                                      163
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            Heinemann, F. (2009), "Economic crisis and morale", CEB Working Paper 09/046

            Higgins, M., Klitgaard, Th. (2011) "Saving Imbalances and the Euro Area Sovereign Debt Crisis",
            Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Volume 17 n. 5

            Johansson, Å. et al. (2008), "Taxation and Economic Growth", OECD Economics Department Working
            Papers, No. 620, OECD Publishing, Paris.

            Johannesson Linden, A., Kalantzis, F., Maincent, E. and Pienkowski, J. (2014): "Electricity Tariff Deficit:
            Temporary or Permanent Problem in the EU?", DG ECFIN, Economic Papers 534, October 2014

            Klingebiel, D. (2001): "The Use of AMC in the Resolution of Banking Crises Cross-Country
            Experiences", World Bank Policy Research Paper No. 2284 (Washington: World Bank), 2001

            Lains, P. (2008), “The Portuguese Economy in the Irish Mirror, 1960-2004”, Open Economies Review,
            Vol. 19, 667-683

            Lemgruber, A., Soto, M. (2012), "Growth Friendly, Equitable, and sustainable Fiscal Reform in
            Portugal", Selected Issues Paper, prepared for the IMF's 2012 Article IV Consultation with Portugal

            Lourtie, P. (2011), "Understanding Portugal in the context of the Euro crisis", in Resolving the European
            Debt Crisis, Peterson Institute for International Economics and Bruegel, February 2012

            Martins, P. , Pessoa e Costa, S. (2014), "Reemployment and substitution effects from increased activation:
            Evidence from times of crisis", CGR Working Papers, No.52, Centre for Globalisation Research, Queen
            Mary, University of London

            Mendes, J.A., Silva, S.T., Silva, E.G. (2014) "Portuguese economic growth revisited: a technology gap
            explanation", FEP Working Papers, n. 545, October 2014

            Mercer (2013), "Análise comparativa das remunerações practicadas no sector público e no sector
            privado", February 2013

            Messina, J., Du Caju, P., Duarte, C. F., Lynggård Hansen, N., Izquierdoet, M. (2010), "The incidence of
            nominal and real wage rigidity: an individual-based sectoral approach", ECB Working Paper Series No.
            1213, June 2010

            Mirrlees, J., Adam, S., Besley, T., Blundell, R., Bond, S., Chote, R., Gammie, M., Johnson, P., Myles, G.,
            Poterba, J. (2010), "Tax by Design: the Mirrlees Review", New York: Oxford University Press.

            Monteagudo, J., Rutkowski, A., Lorenzani, D. (2012), "The economic impact of the Services Directive: A
            first assessment following implementation", DG ECFIN, European Economy, Economic Papers 456, June
            2012.

            Pereira, P.T., Wemans, L., (2012) "Portugal and the global financial crisis – short-sighted politics,
            deteriorating public finances and the bailout imperative", Technical University of Lisbon, Department of
            Economics, Working Papers, July 2012

            Pompe, S., Bergthaler W. (2015), "Reforming the Legal and Institutional Framework for the Enforcement
            of Civil and Commercial Claims in Portugal', IMF Working Series, 15/279, December 2105

            PwC, IFC and the World Bank (2010), "Paying taxes – Doing Business 2011"




164
                                                                                                             References




Reis, R. (2013), “The Portuguese Slump and Crash and the Euro-Crisis”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 46, 143-193, Spring 2013

Sancak, C., Velloso, R., J. Xing (2010), "Tax revenue response to the business cycle", IMF Working
Paper 10/71

Schneider, F. (2010), "Size and development of the shadow economy of 31 European countries from 2003
to 2010", Web. 25 July 2011

Schneider, F. (2013), "Size and Development of the Shadow Economy of 31 European and 5 other OECD
Countries from 2003 to 2013: A further decline", Research Paper

Schneider, F., Williams, C. (2013), "The Shadow Economy", The Institute of Economic Affairs

Silva, E.G., Teixeira, A.A.C. (2008), “Surveying structural change: seminal contributions and a
bibliometric account”, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Vol. 19, pages 273-300

Solsten, E. (1993), "Portugal: A Country Study", Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, Area
Handbook Series (section: The Consolidated Public Sector)

Varga, J., Werner, R., 't Veld, J. (2013) in "Growth Effects of Structural Reforms in Southern Europe: The
case of Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal", DG ECFIN, European Economy, Economic Papers, No 511

Veugelers, R., Mrak, M. (2009), “The knowledge economy and catching up member states of the EU”,
Knowledge Economists Policy Brief, No.5, The European Commission

Wöhlbier F., Astarita C., Mourre G. (2014), "Consolidation on the revenue side and growth-friendly tax
structures: an indicator based approach", DG ECFIN, European Economy, Economic Papers 513,
February 2014

EU and International Institutions

Council of the EU, "Council Recommendation with a view to bringing to an end the situation of an
excessive government deficit in Portugal" – 14238/12, ECOFIN 808, UEM 284, 2 October 2012. See also
corrigendum on 5 October 2012;

Council of the EU, "Council Recommendation with a view to bringing to an end the situation of an
excessive government deficit in Portugal" – 10562/13, ECOFIN 480, UEM 175, OC 363, 18 June 2013.
See also corrigendum on 21 June 2013;

DG ECFIN (2008a), "EMU@10: Successes and challenges of Economic and Monetary Union",
European Economy, 2, 2008

DG ECFIN (2008b), "Portugal: Macro Fiscal Assessment – An analysis of the December 2007 update of
the Stability Programme", February 2008

DG ECFIN (2011a), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal", European Economy, Occasional Paper 79,
June 2011

DG ECFIN (2011b), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – First Review, Summer 2011", European
Economy, Occasional Paper 83, September 2011




                                                                                                                     165
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            DG ECFIN (2011c), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Second Review, Autumn 2011", European
            Economy, Occasional Paper 88, December 2011

            DG ECFIN (2012a), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Third Review, Winter 2011/2012",
            European Economy, Occasional Paper 95, April 2012

            DG ECFIN (2012b), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Fourth Review, Spring 2012", European
            Economy, Occasional Paper 111, July 2012

            DG ECFIN (2012c), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Fifth Review, Summer 2012", European
            Economy, Occasional Paper 117, October 2012

            DG ECFIN (2012d), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Sixth Review, Autumn 2012", European
            Economy, Occasional Paper 124, December 2012

            DG ECFIN (2013a), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Seventh Review, Winter 2012/2013",
            European Economy, Occasional Paper 153, June 2013

            DG ECFIN (2013b), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Eight/Ninth Review, Winter 2012/2013",
            European Economy, Occasional Paper 164, November 2013

            DG ECFIN (2014a), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Tenth Review", European Economy,
            Occasional Paper 171, February 2014

            DG ECFIN (2014b), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal – Eleventh Review", European Economy,
            Occasional Paper 191, April 2014

            DG ECFIN (2014c), "The Economic Adjustment for Portugal, 2011-2014", European Economy,
            Occasional Paper 202, October 2014

            DG ECFIN (2014d), "Post-programme Surveillance for Portugal – Autumn 2014 Report", European
            Economy, Occasional Paper 208, December 2014

            DG ECFIN (2014e), " Market reforms at work in Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece", European
            Economy, 5, 2014

            DG ECFIN (2014f): "Quarterly Report on the EA", Volume 13 No 3, 2014, Section: "Private sector
            deleveraging: where do we stand?"

            DG ECFIN (2015a), "Quarterly Report on the Euro Area", Volume 14, n.4, 2015

            DG ECFIN (2015b), "Post-programme Surveillance Report – Portugal, Spring 2015", European
            Economy, Institutional Paper 6, July 2015

            DG ECFIN (2016a), "Post-programme Surveillance Report – Portugal, Winter 2015/2016", European
            Economy, Institutional Paper 22, April 2016

            DG ECFIN (2016b), "The Economic Impact of Selected Structural Reform Measures in Italy, France,
            Spain and Portugal", European Economy, Institutional Paper 23, April 2016

            DG ECFIN and DG TAXUD (2011), "Tax Reforms in EU Member States 2011", European Economy, 5,
            2011




166
                                                                                                           References




DG ECFIN, DG TAXUD (2012), "Tax Reforms in EU Member States 2012", European Economy, 6,
2012

DG ECFIN, DG TAXUD (2013), "Tax Reforms in EU Member States 2013", European Economy, 5,
2013

DG ECFIN, DG TAXUD (2014), "Tax Reforms in EU Member States – 2014 Report", European
Economy, 6, 2014

DG ECFIN and DG TAXUD (2015), "Tax Reforms in EU Member States – 2015 Report", European
Economy, Institutional Paper 8, 2015

DG EMPL, Social Protection Committee (2015), "The 2015 Pension Adequacy Report: current and
Future Income Adequacy in old age in the EU"

DG Enterprise and Industry, (2010), "Business Dynamics: Start-ups, business transfers and bankruptcy",.

ECB (2010), "EU Banking Structure", September 2010

ECB (2011), "The ECB's non-standard measures – Impact and Phasing-Out", July 2011

ECB (2013a), "Corporate finance and economic activity in the euro area. Structural issues, report 2013",
Occasional paper series, no. 151, August 2013.

ECB (2013b), "Banking Structures Report", November 2013

ECB (2014), "Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis", Keynote Speech by Cœuré,
B., Economic Conference, Latvijas Banka.

ECB (2015a), "Progress with structural reforms across the Euro area and their possible impacts",
Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2015.

ECB (2015b), "Report on financial structures", October 2015

European Commission, ECB (2011), "Joint message on the measures announced by the Portuguese
government", 11th of March 2011.

European Commission (2013): "Ports: an engine for growth", COM(2013) 295, May 2013.

European Commission (2014a): "Reindustrialising Europe - Member States' Competitiveness Report",
SWD (2014) 278.

European Commission (2014b), "Businesses' attitudes towards corruption in the EU" – Flash
Eurobarometer 374.

European Commission (2016), "Country Report Portugal – Including an In-Depth Review on the
prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances", SWD(2016) 90 final, February 2016

IMF (2005), "Portugal – Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation", country report 05/375.

IMF (2007), "Portugal – Staff Report for the 2007 Article IV Consultation", country report 07/341.

IMF (2008), "Portugal – Staff Report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation", country report 08/323.



                                                                                                                   167
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            IMF (2011a), "Portugal: Request for a Three-Year Arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility",
            country report 11/127

            IMF (2011b), "Portugal: First Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 11/279

            IMF (2011c), "Portugal: Second Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 11/363

            IMF (2012a), "Portugal: Third Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 12/77

            IMF (2012b), "Portugal: Fourth Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 12/179

            IMF (2012c), "Portugal: Fifth Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 12/292

            IMF (2013a), "Portugal – Rethinking the State – Selected Expenditure Reform Options", January 2013.

            IMF (2013b), "Portugal: Sixth Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 13/18

            IMF (2013c), "Portugal: Seventh Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 13/160

            IMF (2013d), "Portugal: Eight and Ninth Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report
            13/324

            IMF (2013e), "Assessing Policies to revive credit markets"

            IMF (2014a), "Portugal: Tenth Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 14/56

            IMF (2014b), "Portugal: Eleventh Review under the Extended Arrangement", country report 14/102

            IMF (2014c), "Portugal: Fiscal Transparency Evaluation", country report 14/306

            IMF (2014d), "Fiscal Policy and Income Inequality", IMF Policy Paper.

            IMF (2014e), "Adjustment in Euro Area Deficit Countries: Progress, Challenges, and Policies", Staff
            Discussion Notes No. 14/7, July 2014.

            IMF (2015a), "Portugal - Second Post-Programme Monitoring", country report 15/226

            IMF (2015b), "Portugal – Staff Report for the 2015 Article IV Consultation", country report 15/126.

            IMF (2015c), "Portugal – Selected Issues", country report 15/127

            IMF (2015d), "Crisis Program Review", IMF Policy Paper

            IMF (2015e), "A Strategy for Resolving Europe's problem Loans", IMF Staff Discussion Note

            IMF (2016), "Portugal - Third Post-Programme Monitoring", country report 16/97

            OECD (2010), "Economic Surveys – Portugal"

            OECD (2011a), "Forum on tax administration in OECD and selected non-OECD countries: comparative
            information series", OECD Publishing

            OECD (2012a), "Human Resources Management Country Profiles - Portugal"



168
                                                                                                        References




OECD (2012b), "Economic Surveys – Portugal"

OECD (2013a), "Pensions at a glance 2013: Country Profiles – Portugal"

OECD (2013b), "Portugal: Reforming the State to Promote Growth"

OECD (2013c), "Tax Administration 2013: Comparative Information on OECD and Other Advanced and
Emerging Economies", OECD Publishing, Paris

OECD (2014a), "Revenue Statistics 2014"

OECD (2014b), "Consumption Tax Trends 2014"

OECD (2014c), "Economic Surveys – Portugal 2014"

OECD (2014d), "Portugal: Deepening Structural Reform to Support Growth and Competitiveness",
Better Policies Series, July 2014.

OECD (2015a), "Tax Administration 2015: Comparative Information on OECD and Other Advanced and
Emerging Economies", OECD Publishing, Paris

OECD (2015b), "International Migration Outlook"

OECD "Health Statistics, Country Notes – Portugal", Several years.

World Bank, "Doing Business", Several years: 2011-2015.

Portuguese authorities/agencies

Banco de Portugal (2008), "Financial Stability Report"

Banco de Portugal (2011a), "Portugal – EU/IMF Financial Assistance Programme 2011-2014"

Banco de Portugal, Ministério das Finanças, Ministério da Economia e do Emprego, Ministério da
Solidariedade e Segurança Social (document drafted by representatives of these institutions) (2011b),
"Desvalorização Fiscal – Relatório", July 2011

Council of Ministers - Portugal (2011), "Portugal 2020 - National Reform Programme",
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/nrp/nrp_portugal_en.pdf, March 2011.

CdF (Conselho das Finanças Públicas) (2013), "Analysis of the General Government Account 2012",
April 2013

CdF (Conselho das Finanças Públicas) (2014a), "Analysis of the General Government Account 2013",
April 2014

CdF (Conselho das Finanças Públicas) (2014b), "Social protection systems", October 2014

CdF (Conselho das Finanças Públicas) (2015a), "Analysis of the General Government Account 2014",
April 2015

CdF (Conselho das Finanças Públicas) (2015b), "Finanças Públicas: Situaçao e Condocionantes 2015-
2019 – Atualização", October 2015



                                                                                                                169
 European Commission
 Ex post evaluation of the economic adjustment programme for Portugal (2011-2014)




            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2009), "Movimento Processual nos
            Tribunais Administrativos e Fiscais (1a and 2a Instâncias) – Anual 2009"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2010), "Movimento Processual nos
            Tribunais Administrativos e Fiscais (1a and 2a Instâncias) – Anual 2010"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2011), "Movimento Processual nos
            Tribunais Administrativos e Fiscais (1a and 2a Instâncias) – Anual 2011"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2011b), "Relatório relativo aos
            Processos Tributários Superiores a 1Milhão de Euros"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2012), "Movimento Processual nos
            Tribunais Administrativos e Fiscais (1a and 2a Instâncias) – Anual 2012"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2012b), "Relatório T4/2011 -
            Processos Tributários Superiores a 1Milhão de Euros"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2013), "Movimento Processual nos
            Tribunais Administrativos e Fiscais (1a and 2a Instâncias) – Anual 2013"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2013b), "Relatório T1/2013 -
            Processos Tributários Superiores a 1Milhão de Euros"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2014), "Movimento Processual nos
            Tribunais Administrativos e Fiscais (1a and 2a Instâncias) – Anual 2014"

            CSTAF (Conselho Superior dos Tribunais Administrativo e Fiscais) (2014b), "Relatório anual 2014 -
            Processos Tributários Superiores a 1Milhão de Euros"

            DGO (Direção-Geral do Orçamento) (2011), S" ínteses da Execução Orçamental for 2011"

            DGO (Direção-Geral do Orçamento) (2012), "Sínteses da Execução Orçamental for 2012"

            DGO (Direção-Geral do Orçamento) (2013), "Sínteses da Execução Orçamental for 2013"

            DGO (Direção-Geral do Orçamento) (2014), "Sínteses da Execução Orçamental for 2014"

            DGO (Direção-Geral do Orçamento) (2015), "Sínteses da Execução Orçamental for 2015"

            DGPJ (Direção-Geral da Política de Justiça), Quarterly Justice Statistics, 2011-2015.
            http://www.siej.dgpj.mj.pt/webeis/index.jsp?username=Publico&pgmWindowName=pgmWindow_6339
            18141195530467.

            DGTF (Direçao –Geral do Tesouro e Finança) (2014), "Boletim Informativo sobre o Sector Empresarial
            do Estado – 4° Trimestre 2013", page 29, February 2014

            DGTF (Direçao –Geral do Tesouro e Finança) (2015), "Boletim Informativo sobre o Sector Empresarial
            do Estado – 4° Trimestre 2014", page 32, April 2015.

            GovP (Governo de Portugal) (2011), "Note on policy guidelines and measures the Portuguese
            Government will adoptto address main economic challenges", March 2011




170
                                                                                                         References




GovP (Governo de Portugal) (2013), "Um Estado Melhor", 30/10/2013

GovP (Governo de Portugal, Secretário de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais) (2015), "Plano Estratégico -
Combate à Fraude e Evasão Fiscais e Aduaneiras 2015-2017", January 2015

GovP (Governo de Portugal) (2014), "A Gestão do Programa do Ajustamento 2011-2014", ESAME, May
2014.

GovP (Governo de Portugal) (2014), "The road to growth: a medium-term reform strategy for Portugal",
May 2014.

IGCP (Agência de Gestão da Tesouraria e da Dívida Pública), Relatório Annual de Gestão de Tesouraria
de Estado e da Dívida Pública, 2011 and 2014

IGCP (Agência de Gestão da Tesouraria e da Dívida Pública), Notes and Presentations to Investors 2011-
2016, http://www.igcp.pt/gca/?id=55.

IGCP (Agência de Gestão da Tesouraria e da Dívida Pública), Monthly Bulletins on Government Debt,
2011-2016, http://www.igcp.pt/gca/?id=107.

INE (2011a), "EDP (1st notification of 2011)", 21 March 2011

INE (2011b), "EDP (revision of the 1st notification of 2011)", 23 April 2011

INE (2011c), "EDP (2nd notification of 2011)", 30 September 2011

INE (2014a), "EDP (2nd notification for 2014)", 30 September 2014

INE (Statistics Portugal), Destaques, Press Releases on various topics, 2011-2016.

INE (2015), "Business Statistics' Studies", October 2015

MdF (Ministério das Finanças) (2011), "Plano Estratégico de Combate à Fraude e Evasão Fiscais e
Aduaneiras 2012-2014", October 2011

MdF (Ministério das Finanças) (2012), "Orçamento do Estado para 2012 – Relatório"

UTAP (2014), "Relatório Annual das PPP 2014"

UTAP (2015), "Relatório Annual das PPP 2015"




                                                                                                                 171
EUROPEAN ECONOMY INSTITUTIONAL SERIES


European Economy Institutional series can be accessed and downloaded free of charge from the
following address:
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/eeip/index_en.htm


Titles published before July 2015 can be accessed and downloaded free of charge from:
•       http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/european_economy/index_en.htm
        (the main reports, e.g. Economic Forecasts)
•       http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/occasional_paper/index_en.htm
        (the Occasional Papers)
•       http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/qr_euro_area/index_en.htm
        (the Quarterly Reports on the Euro Area)


Alternatively, hard copies may be ordered via the “Print-on-demand” service offered by the EU
Bookshop: http://bookshop.europa.eu.
HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS


Free publications:
• one copy:
   via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

•   more than one copy or posters/maps:
    - from the European Union’s representations (http://ec.europa.eu/represent_en.htm);
    - from the delegations in non-EU countries (http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/index_en.htm);
    - by contacting the Europe Direct service (http://europa.eu/europedirect/index_en.htm) or
      calling 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (freephone number from anywhere in the EU) (*).

    (*)   The information given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or hotels may charge you).



Priced publications:
• via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).
                   KC-BC-16-040-EN-N




ISBN 978-92-79-54355-5
