                     ANNUAL REPORT
                     The Portuguese Economy in 2012




ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                 EUROSYSTEM
         ANNUAL REPORT

T HE P ORT UGUE S E E C O NO MY

                           2012




                    Lisbon, 2013
                 www.bportugal.pt
BANCO DE PORTUGAL

Av. Almirante Reis, 71

1150-012 Lisboa




www.bportugal.pt




Edition

Economics and Research Department




Design, printing and distribution

Administrative Services Department

Documentation Editing and Museum Division

Editing and Publishing Unit




Number of copies

120

ISBN 978-989-678-181-1 (print)

ISBN 978-989-678-1182-8 (on-line)

ISSN 2182-5874 (print)

ISSN 2182-5882 (on-line)

Depósito Legal n.º 342675/12
      CONTENTS


      MANAGEMENT OF THE BANK


      HEADS OF DEPARTMENT, REGIONAL DELEGATIONS AND DISTRICT
      AGENCIES

      I. THE PORTUGUESE ECONOMY IN 2011


 17      OVERVIEW

25       Box A comparison between the adjustment of the Portuguese economy and
         previous domestic and international experiences

 33    1. INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT

43       Box 1.1 Recent changes in monetary policy strategy in the United States, the
         United Kingdom and Japan

 45    2. ECB MONETARY POLICY AND THE MONETARY AND FINANCIAL
          CONDITIONS OF THE PORTUGUESE ECONOMY

 45      2.1. ECB monetary policy

 48      2.2. Monetary and ﬁnancial conditions of the Portuguese
         economy
59       Box 2.1 Differences in monetary policy transmission between euro area
         countries
63       Box 2.2 Margins in bank interest rates: Portugal within the euro area
67       Box 2.3 Differentiation in credit to non-ﬁnancial corporations with cross-
         referencing of size and sector of activity

 71    3. FISCAL POLICY AND SITUATION

79       Box 3.1 Temporary measures and special factors with an impact on the 2012
         ﬁscal outturn
81       Box 3.2 Composition of the structural ﬁscal adjustment in Portugal under the
         Economic and Financial Assistance Programme
87       Box 3.3 Deﬁcit-debt adjustments in the context of the Economic and Financial
         Assistance Programme

 89    4. SUPPLY

101      Box 4.1 Cost structure and proﬁt margins of Portuguese ﬁrms
105   5. DEMAND

117     Box 5.1 The rise in households’ saving rate in 2012: an explanation based on
        macro and microeconomic evidence
121     Box 5.2 Portuguese export market shares in 2012: An analysis based on a
        sample of export markets

125   6. PRICES

129     Box 6.1 The mechanical impact from indirect taxation and administered prices
        on the inﬂation rate

131   7. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
MANAGEMENT OF THE BANK
                                          7




                                         Management of the Bank
GOVERNOR

Carlos da Silva Costa




BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Governor

Carlos da Silva Costa


Vice-Governors

Pedro Miguel de Seabra Duarte Neves

José Joaquim Berberan e Santos Ramalho


Directors

José António da Silveira Godinho

João José Amaral Tomaz
BOARD OF AUDITORS                           9




                                           Management of the Bank
Chairman

Emílio Rui da Veiga Peixoto Vilar




Members

Rui José Conceição Nunes

Amável Alberto Freixo Calhau




ADVISORY BOARD

Carlos da Silva Costa

Pedro Miguel de Seabra Duarte Neves

José Joaquim Berberan e Santos Ramalho

Manuel Jacinto Nunes

José da Silva Lopes

Vítor Manuel Ribeiro Constâncio

José Alberto Vasconcelos Tavares Moreira

Luís Miguel Couceiro Pizarro Beleza

António José Fernandes de Sousa

Emílio Rui da Veiga Peixoto Vilar

Valentim Xavier Pintado

Almerindo da Silva Marques

João Moreira Rato

Roberto de Sousa Rocha Amaral

Rui Manuel Teixeira Gonçalves
    HEADS OF DEPARTMENT,
REGIONAL DELEGATIONS AND
        DISTRICT AGENCIES
Ofﬁce of the Governor (GAB)                                13




                                                           Heads of department, regional delegations and district agencies
Paulo Ernesto Carvalho Amorim

Secretariat to the Boards (SEC)
Paulo Ernesto Carvalho Amorim

Legal Enforcement Department (DAS)
José da Cunha Nunes Pereira

Audit Department (DAU)
Francisco Martins da Rocha

Accounting Department (DCC)
José Pedro Silva Ferreira

Issue and Treasury Department (DET)
António Pinto Pereira

Statistics Department (DDE)
João António Cadete de Matos

Economics and Research Department (DEE)
Ana Cristina de Sousa Leal

Human Resources Department (DRH)
António Manuel Marques Garcia

Risk Management Department (DGR)
Helena Maria de Almeida Martins Adegas

Markets and Reserve Management Department (DMR)
Rui Manuel Franco Rodrigues Carvalho

Organisation and Information Technology Department (DOI)
António Jacinto S. Nunes Marques

International Relations Department (DRI)
Nuno Homem Leal de Faria

Administrative Services Department (DSA)
Eugénio Fernandes Gaspar
                                         Banking Conduct Supervision Department (DSC)
                                         Maria Lúcia de Almeida Leitão

                                         Banking Prudential Supervision Department (DSP)

14                                       Vasco Manuel da Silva Pereira
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         Legal Services Department (DJU)

                                         José Gabriel Cortez Rodrigues Queiró

                                         Payment Systems Department (DPG)

                                         Jorge Manuel Egrejas Francisco




                                         OPORTO BRANCH
                                         Manuel Maia Marques




                                         REGIONAL DELEGATIONS

                                         Regional Delegation of the Azores

                                         Ibéria Maria de Medeiros Cabral Serpa

                                         Regional Delegation of Madeira

                                         Maria Heliodora Vieira Geraldes Matos




                                         DISTRICT AGENCIES

                                         Braga

                                         Fernanda da Conceição C. Carvalho Barros

                                         Castelo Branco

                                         Rui António da Silva Santa Rajado

                                         Coimbra

                                         Maria João Botelho Simões Raposo de Sousa

                                         Évora

                                         Paulo Ruben Alvernaz Rodrigues

                                         Faro

                                         Victor Manuel Geraldes Ribeiro

                                         Viseu

                                         Gentil Pedrinho Amado
THE PORTUGUESE ECONOMY                                 I
                 IN 2012

                                          OVERVIEW

                        INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT      1

ECB MONETARY POLICY AND THE MONETARY AND FINANCIAL     2
            CONDITIONS OF THE PORTUGUESE ECONOMY

                         FISCAL POLICY AND SITUATION   3


                                             SUPPLY    4

                                           DEMAND      5

                                              PRICES   6

                              BALANCE OF PAYMENTS      7
Overview

                                                                                                                  17
The on-going adjustment process of the Portuguese economy




                                                                                                                  Overview
The Portuguese economy saw a steep fall in output and a substantial rise in unemployment in 2012. This
evolution came against an external backdrop marked by a recession in the euro area and a slowdown
in world economic growth, and internally, by a continuing contractionary ﬁscal policy and restrictive
monetary and ﬁnancial conditions, though the latter eased slightly. Over and against the costs stemming
from the decline in activity, the adjustment of the Portuguese economy continued, namely in terms of
rebalancing the current and capital account, reducing the structural primary deﬁcit and, as a consequence,
improving the perception of risk among international investors.

The recent path of the Portuguese economy reﬂects a process of correction of macro-economic imbal-
ances and structural problems that have been developing over a long period of time, which the inter-
national economic and ﬁnancial crisis turned impossible to postpone. Various factors contributed to the
signiﬁcant accumulation of macro-economic imbalances in the Portuguese economy. These factors have
different natures and unfold over different time horizons but their effects overlap and reinforce each
other. In particular, the Portuguese economy presented for some decades a trade deﬁcit that stemmed
from fragilities in the production of tradable goods. To this structural fragility added, as from the end of
the 1980s, the gradual entrance of Asian and Central and Eastern European countries in international
trade, together with the fragmentation of international productive chains, which changes the pattern of
worldwide comparative advantages. In this context it is inevitable to substantially restructure sectors and
enterprises, which brings short-term costs. The difﬁculties of reconversion were signiﬁcantly complicated
by structural weaknesses in the Portuguese economy, speciﬁcally the low levels of human capital and the
inefﬁcient rotation of workers associated with the segmentation of the labour market. Additionally, the
participation in the euro brought stable prices along with lower and less volatile interest rates, leading to a
substantial increase in internal demand, promoting the reallocation of resources towards the non-tradable
sector and deteriorating the external imbalance. The new economic regime required the assumption of
different behaviours from the part of economic agents and the creation of appropriate incentives. Only
in this way would it be possible to ensure that the higher levels of household consumption, the higher
standards in the services provided by general government and the dynamics of investment resulted from
structural gains in productivity. These gains would have to be anchored in a signiﬁcant rise in the open-
ness of the economy so as to ensure the sustainability of debt levels. This, however, did not happen in
full, in particular as regards ﬁscal policy, which was generally pro-cyclical, aggravating the imbalances
that existed in the private sector. Moreover, the weak capacity to attract foreign direct investment, the
fragilities in the judicial system and the inefﬁciencies in some administrative procedures all contributed
to a sustained decline in the rate of growth of total factor productivity.

The successive imbalances in the public and external accounts and the inherent worsening of public debt
levels and of the international investment position substantially increased the exposure of the Portuguese
economy to the risks of an adverse external shock. This shock materialized with the international economic
and ﬁnancial crisis, the ensuing increase in risk and uncertainty in international ﬁnancial markets and the
subsequent spread to the sovereign debt crisis in 2010. The imminence of an abrupt halt in the ﬁnancing
to the Portuguese economy forced the adoption of an adjustment program and the sharp acceleration
in the unavoidable process of correcting the macro-economic imbalances and the structural problems.

As things stand, the on-going adjustment of the Portuguese economy is hampered by the continuing
stagnation in the European economic situation. The mitigation of the costs of the adjustment process
depends on the improvement of this macroeconomic environment, as well as on the European institu-
tional framework, with progress in terms of the construction of a banking union and an economic and
monetary union that is stronger and able to generate conﬁdence in economic agents.
                                         The external environment is marked by the recession in the euro area, slowdown in world
                                         economic growth, an expansionary monetary policy and the synchronization of a restrictive
                                         ﬁscal policy stance in some advanced economies
I
                                         The external environment of the Portuguese economy in 2012 was marked by the economic recession
18                                       in the euro area, a slowdown in world economic growth, stemming in part from turmoil in the interna-
                                         tional ﬁnancial markets and from the synchronization of restrictive ﬁscal policy stances in some advanced
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         economies, against the background of a sovereign debt crisis in the euro area and the possible ending of
                                         ﬁscal stimulus in the United States (US). From the second half of the year, the measures announced by
                                         the monetary authorities helped to smooth the tensions in ﬁnancial markets, though there still remained
                                         some uncertainty as to their implementation (see “Box 1.1 Recent changes in the monetary policy strategy
                                         in the US, United Kingdom and Japan”, in this Report). In 2013, ﬁnancial tensions reignited in the wake
                                         of negotiations of the adjustment programme for Cyprus.

                                         In 2012 the monetary policy stance for the euro area remained largely accommodative with a histori-
                                         cally low level of ofﬁcial interest rates, in a context of easing inﬂationary pressures on the time horizon
                                         relevant for monetary policy.


                                         A gradual improvement in monetary and ﬁnancial conditions in the Portuguese economy
                                         accompanied by a fall in the level of risk perceived by international investors, even though
                                         they were still restrictive

                                         The monetary and ﬁnancial conditions for the Portuguese economy improved gradually over the year,
                                         though they were still restrictive, against a background of disturbances in the transmission of monetary
                                         policy (see “Box 2.1 Differences in monetary policy transmission between euro area countries”, in this
                                         Report). This development beneﬁted from the unconventional monetary policy measures adopted by the
                                         European Central Bank (ECB) and the capital increases carried out by various banks, making it possible for
                                         them to improve solvency and liquidity indicators. In terms of sovereign debt, an easing of the turbulence
                                         in the international ﬁnancial markets was helped by the ECB announcement of a programme of Outright
                                         Monetary Transactions, along with the process of budgetary consolidation that is under way. This, then,
                                         was the backdrop for an operation put in place by the government involving the exchange of public
                                         debt with maturity in 2013 for debt maturing in 2015, followed by the issuance of 5 and 10-year public
                                         bonds that took place already in early 2013. In tandem, some ﬁnancial institutions returned, though on
                                         a limited scale, to funding on the international wholesale debt markets.

                                         Within this framework, there was a fall in new business bank lending rate to non-ﬁnancial corporations
                                         and to households mortgages and the decline in banking credit to the non-ﬁnancial private sector began
                                         moderate towards the end of the year. In tandem, bank’s credit standards applied to the approval of
                                         loans were altered, leading to the inversion of the tightening process initiated in 2007. Bank lending
                                         rates to non-ﬁnancial corporations, however, remained higher than the euro area average. Various factors
                                         seem to have played a part in this, namely the high average cost of ﬁnancing and the worsening of
                                         the ﬁnancial situation in many companies, particularly on the non-tradable sector, more affected by the
                                         on-going adjustment process in the economy. This development came as there was a signiﬁcant cut in
                                         rates on new deposits, though this went hand in hand with a far lower reduction in the new business
                                         bank lending rates. These dynamics led to widening margins on new business, in contrast to the move
                                         on implicit margins on outstanding amounts, which continued to narrow, reaching record lows (see “Box
                                         2.2 Banking interest rate margins: Portugal in the context of the Euro area”, in this Report).

                                         Large ﬁrms were able to keep access to credit open or found alternative sources of ﬁnancing at a more
                                         beneﬁcial cost, whereas small and medium-sized ﬁrms continued to face ﬁnancing problems. Be this as
                                         it may, there is in fact a close interrelationship between the evolution of credit by ﬁrm size and sector.
                                         While credit to construction, real estate development and retail – where the proportion of small and
                                         micro sized ﬁrms is larger – recorded negative annual rates of change, the aggregate of the remaining
sectors came in with a slightly increase for the year as a whole (see “Box 2.3 Differentiation in credit to
non-ﬁnancial corporations, crossing ﬁrm dimension and sector”, in this Report).

Overall, the process of deleveraging in the Portuguese economy continued during the year. In the banking
system, this took the form of a reduction in credit to non-residents and the resident private sector, while
the ﬁnancing for the public administrations grew. In this context, there was a considerable decline in total
                                                                                                                19
credit to households and a substantial rise in the savings rate of this sector. Households’ indebtedness




                                                                                                                Overview
continued on a downward trend, a process that has been observed since 2009. In turn, deleveraging in
the corporate sector is still considerably more modest, the essential focus being on buttressing company
capital. In this context, the diversiﬁcation of funding sources can also contribute to reduce the risk and
costs of Portuguese ﬁrms.


Contractionary and pro-cyclical ﬁscal policy, leading to major structural adjustment

Fiscal policy continued to have a contractionary and pro-cyclical stance brought by a variation of the
primary structural balance, excluding special factors, of 3.4 percentage points (p.p.) of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP). In cumulative terms, the effort to comply with the objectives set out in the Economic and
Financial Assistance Programme has led to a variation in this indicator that reﬂects a ﬁscal adjustment of
7.2 p.p. of GDP for the period between 2010 and 2012. In the National Accounts deﬁnition, the deﬁcit
in general government stood at 6.4 per cent of GDP in 2012, a 2.7 p.p. fall from 2010 when corrected
for one-off measures and special factors. This ﬁgure is particularly signiﬁcant in a period when the cyclical
position of the Portuguese economy is worsening (see “Box 3.1 Temporary measures and special factors
with impact in the 2012 budgetary outturn”, in this Report).

The improvement in the structural primary balance stemmed fundamentally from a fall in public
spending. The move hinged on measures than will not be repeated in 2013, given the decisions handed
down by the Constitutional Court. Nevertheless, measures of comparable magnitude are expected to
be adopted in the course of the year. In addition, structural revenues as a percentage of trend GDP
practically stabilized during the year, coming in substantially below the amount initially forecasted (see
“Box 3.2 Composition of the structural ﬁscal adjustment in Portugal in the context of the Economic and
Financial Adjustment Program”, in this Report). Having in mind the high level of marginal tax rates, it
is necessary that the favourable effect of economic growth on public accounts is used to create a ﬁscal
environment that is favourable to investment and employment creation, once the sustainable trajectory
for public ﬁnances is assured.

The level of public debt continued to rise considerably during the year, coming in at year-end at 123.6
per cent of GDP, which compares with 94.0 per cent in 2010. This increase was associated with the
downward path of the economy, but it also reﬂects the impact of very signiﬁcant deﬁcit-debt adjustments
(see “Box 3.3 The deﬁcit-debt adjustments in the context of the Economic and Financial Adjustment
Program”, in this Report). A contribution to the evolution in the debt ratio since 2010 came from general
government deposits, whose stock stands at 11.6 per cent of GDP at year-end 2012.


Economic activity contracts across the board, though there is heterogeneity across ﬁrms

During the year, the economic contraction affected all sectors, especially those more dependent on
internal demand, particularly construction. Even though there was a contraction in aggregate terms,
a large number of ﬁrms should have increased its Gross Value Added (GVA). This heterogeneity in the
evolution of GVA is also visible in other aspects, among them the cost structure (see “Box 4.1 Cost
structure and proﬁt margins in Portuguese ﬁrms”, in this Report). The existence of structural conditions
enabling more ﬂexible and innovative ﬁrms to grow is a fundamental condition for reviving activity in
the Portuguese economy and implies the continuation of the structural reforms agenda.
                                         The steep decline in domestic demand is attenuated by exports growth, leading to a surplus
                                         in the current and capital account

I                                        The year of 2012 was marked by a GDP decline of 3.2 per cent, following a 1.6 per cent fall in 2011.
                                         Domestic demand contracted 6.8 per cent, with every component of contributing to this outcome.
20                                       Private consumption declined by 5.6 per cent, against the background of a decline in disposable income
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         perceived to have a permanent nature; by the marked deterioration in labour market conditions; and by
                                         the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the ﬁscal measures to be adopted. As a result, there was a
                                         substantial increase in the savings rate during the year, reinforced by the increase in the share of liquidity
                                         constrained households and by composition effects related to the growth of some types of income being
                                         earned by families with higher propensity to save (see “Box 5.1 The increase in households’ savings rate
                                         in 2012: An explanation based on macro and microeconomic evidence”, in this Report).

                                         Investment declined by 13.7 per cent over the year, after a similar fall in 2011. The drop in Gross Fixed
                                         Capital Formation (GFCF) was spread across every institutional sector. In particular, corporate GFCF was
                                         down steeply, in fact more so than in previous years. This development stemmed from the worsening
                                         prospects for demand in domestic markets and the increase in uncertainty, in combination with the low
                                         level of capacity utilization, the need for ﬁrms to reduce indebtedness and, though to a lesser degree,
                                         the still restrictive ﬁnancing conditions. The residential GFCF recorded a strong decrease in line with the
                                         trend observed in the last decade. Public investment plunged again, reﬂecting mostly the behaviour of
                                         enterprises that were recently included in general government perimeter.

                                         The combined moves in exports and imports provided a positive note for the evolution of economic
                                         activity. Exports of goods and services came in with a volume growth of 3.3 per cent, decelerating
                                         markedly year-on-year in spite of a considerable gain in the market share. Although exports of goods
                                         recorded a signiﬁcant gain in market share among the country’s main trading partners and in spite of
                                         its recent diversiﬁcation across destinations, they were hindered by geographical orientation (see “Box
                                         5.2 Portuguese export market shares in 2012: An analysis based on a sample of export markets”, in
                                         this Report). In a context of continued contraction in global demand, imports recorded a new sizeable
                                         decline in 2012.

                                         A rebalancing of the external accounts was recorded in 2012, with the joint balance of the current and
                                         capital accounts coming in with a surplus of 0.8 per cent of GDP, following deﬁcits of 5.8 per cent in
                                         2011 and 9.4 per cent in 2010. It should be noted that the trade balance on goods and services was
                                         virtually balanced, an unprecedented event in the last decades in the Portuguese economy. The fall in
                                         the economy’s ﬁnancing requirements reﬂected the considerable rise in the domestic savings rate and,
                                         to a lesser extent, the reduction of the investment rate and a larger surplus of the net capital transfers.
                                         The evolution of the ﬁnancial balance was fundamentally the result of rebalancing external ﬁnancing,
                                         with a substantial cut in net liabilities in portfolio investment across all the resident institutional sectors,
                                         accompanied by a considerable inﬂow of funds in general government associated with the disbursement
                                         of loans as part of the Economic and Financial Assistance Programme.


                                         As conditions in the labour market worsened considerably, salaries were reined in and
                                         consumer prices slowed down

                                         The labour market worsened considerably during the year, mirroring the path of economic activity in
                                         2012. Employment in the Portuguese economy was 4.2 per cent down and the unemployment rate
                                         rose to 15.7 per cent, 3 p.p. up on a year earlier. The youth unemployment rate stood at 37.7 per cent,
                                         a 7.6 p.p. rise on 2011. The worsening of the labour market is one of the most serious effects of the
                                         adjustment process in the Portuguese economy, giving rise to a massive accumulated fall in employment,
                                         along with a continuing structural rise in the unemployment rate and a decline in the labour force. Addi-
                                         tionally, the ﬂows between states in the labour market point towards an increase of the segmentation.
                                         Such aspects have relevant implications in potential growth, namely through the depreciation of human
                                         capital associated with unemployment and the lower investment in training. The developments in the
labour market in 2012 originated a fall in real wages in the private sector in aggregate terms in 2012,
along with a substantial composition effect as many jobs with lower wages were destroyed. A huge cut
in general government’s wage bill occurred in 2012, with the number of workers down and, above all,
with suspension of the Christmas and holiday bonuses.

The inﬂation rate in Portugal, measured by the annual average growth rate of the HICP (Harmonized
                                                                                                              21
Index of Consumer Prices) stood at 2.8 per cent for the year, a 0.8 p.p. decline vis-à-vis 2011. It should




                                                                                                              Overview
be noted that this evolution was heavily conditioned by the measures concerning indirect taxation and
administered prices, with mechanical impacts estimated at around 2 p.p. in price increases in both 2011
and 2012 (see “Box 6.1 Mechanical impact of indirect taxation and administered prices in the inﬂa-
tion rate”, in this Report). Indeed, excluding these effects, the worsening of the cyclical position of the
economy and of labour market conditions implied a slowdown in consumer prices, which is an important
channel to restore competitiveness and to correct macro-economic imbalances in a monetary union.


The process of adjustment under way in the Portuguese economy is likely to be prolonged,
especially in what concerns the unemployment rate

The adjustment process under way in the Portuguese economy is different in nature from those of the
1970s and 1980s. In fact, the absorption of unemployment will depend on the extension and speed
of structural adjustment in the economy, which will be a function of the impact of on-going structural
reforms on the reallocation of resources towards the tradable sector and, particularly, on foreign direct
investment. The gradualism of this process is also due to the existence of higher levels of public and
private indebtedness (see “Box A comparison of the adjustment in the Portuguese economy with that
of previous national and international experiences”, in this Report).

The correction of accumulated imbalances, in tandem with the restructuring of sectors and ﬁrms, is
a challenge facing many European economies. If competitiveness problems are not solved, potential
growth is hampered and larger asymmetries in income per capita across euro area countries arise. In fact,
the dynamics in national economies within a monetary union can show similar traces to inter-regional
divergences within a single country, but aggravated due to the lack of an integrated ﬁscal policy and
due to the persistence of difﬁculties in the mobility of some factors of production. In this context, a
strong deterioration of the Portuguese economic situation may have a long-lasting negative impact on
potential growth, materializing in an on-going reduction of the stock of capital, in the depreciation of
human capital among unemployed workers and in the emigration of qualiﬁed young people.


There is a need for social consensus regarding the guidelines of the adjustment process,
against the backdrop of discipline imposed by globalization

The ability to mitigate this scenario depends, among other factors, on a social consensus regarding the
guidelines of the adjustment process. This is a fundamental condition for maintaining credibility in the
ﬁnancial markets and among international authorities. One important assumption underlying this analysis
is that any smoothing of the adjustment effort, speciﬁcally in ﬁscal terms, is constrained by the need to
guarantee ﬁnancing for the Portuguese economy and implies higher debt levels, which may aggravate
its sustainability conditions. Therefore, it is important that fundamental macro-economic balances are
preserved from an intertemporal point of view, thus contributing to normalize the ﬁnancing of the
Portuguese State in the international sovereign debt markets.

The Portuguese economy has undertaken a major macro-economic adjustment, shouldering signiﬁcant
costs through the fall in activity and the underutilization of factors of production. Renewed momentum
geared to employment creation and investment (including foreign investment) will only be brought about
by the maintenance of social stability and a continuing improvement of competitiveness. The costs of
the adjustment under way can only be attenuated by the dynamism of tradable sectors, which requires
the reallocation of resources to those sectors, driven by private sector decisions and beneﬁting from the
                                         catalysing role of the public sector. In this context, the existence of a favourable external framework is
                                         also a crucial factor, not only in terms of external demand growth, but also in terms of building a stronger
                                         European institutional framework that generates conﬁdence in economic agents.
I                                        The Portuguese economy is an integral part of an increasingly demanding global economy. From a struc-
                                         tural point of view, ﬁrms will need to be ﬂexible and innovate, given the increasing speed of innovative
22
                                         processes, the added competition to attract inward foreign investment, and the wider repercussions of
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         economic crises and volatility in ﬁnancial markets. The macro-economic difﬁculties facing the Portuguese
                                         economy at this point in time imply substantial social costs and bring risks, but these should not hinder
                                         the willingness to pursue a broad structural reform agenda, including the administration of the State and
                                         the design of social policies. These reforms should bring about structural reductions in public expenditure,
                                         and mainly ensure a framework of stability and the fostering of competitiveness to ready the economy for
                                         its current challenges. Structural reforms are deﬁning moments for the regeneration of social capital, and
                                         should stimulate the stability and predictability in the incentive framework characterizing the economy.
                                         Constant changes in this framework are not conducive to investment or to the sustained creation of
                                         employment, and these are the essential pillars on which potential output can be built.
Table 1
PORTUGAL – MAIN ECONOMIC INDICATORS, 2008-2011
                                                                                            Units           2009      2010      2011       2012

I.      Prices, wages and unit labour costs
        Inﬂation (HICP)                                                                     arc %            -0.9       1.4        3.6       2.8
          Goods                                                                             arc %            -2.4       1.7        4.4       2.5
          Services                                                                          arc %             1.3         1        2.4       3.2
                                                                                                                                                      23
        Inﬂation (CPI)                                                                      arc %            -0.8       1.4        3.7       2.8




                                                                                                                                                      Overview
        GDP Deﬂator                                                                         arc %             0.9       0.6        0.5      -0.1
          Private consumption deﬂator                                                       arc %            -2.2       1.3        3.8       2.1
          Goods and services export deﬂator                                                 arc %            -5.0       3.9        5.5       1.4
          Goods and services import deﬂator                                                 arc %            -9.2       4.6        8.1       1.6
        Nominal compensation per employee, total economy(a)                                 arc %             2.8       2.0       -0.7      -2.7
          Nominal compensation per employee, private sector(b)                              arc %             1.5       2.9        1.1      -0.1
        Unit labour costs, total economy(a)                                                 arc %             3.1      -1.4       -0.7      -3.8
          Unit labour costs, private sector(b)                                              arc %             1.6      -1.3        1.3      -1.2
II.     Expenditure, income and savings
        Gross domestic product (GDP)                                                       rrc %             -2.9       1.9      -1.6      -3.2
          Total domestic demand                                                            rrc %             -3.3       1.8      -5.8      -6.8
            Private consumption                                                            rrc %             -2.3       2.5      -3.8      -5.6
            Public consumption                                                             rrc %              4.7       0.1      -4.3      -4.4
            Gross ﬁxed capital formation                                                   rrc %             -8.6      -3.1     -10.7     -14.5
          Exports of goods and services                                                    rrc %            -10.9      10.2       7.2       3.3
          Imports of goods and services                                                    rrc %            -10.0       8.0      -5.9      -6.9
        Household disposable income (DI)                                                   rrc %              1.8       1.7      -4.9      -2.9
          Household disposable income, excluding external transfers                        rrc %              2.3       1.5      -5.0      -3.4
        Domestic savings rate                                                             % of GDP            9.4       9.8      10.6      14.1
          Private sector(c)                                                               % of GDP           16.4      16.8      15.4      18.8
            Households                                                                     % of DI           10.9      10.1       9.1      11.6
              Households, excluding external transfers                                    % of DI             9.2       8.3       7.2       9.4
            Corporations                                                                  % of GDP            8.4       9.4       8.7      10.0
          General government                                                              % of GDP           -6.9      -7.0      -4.9      -4.7
III.    Employment and unemployment
        Total employment(d)                                                               arc %              -2.7      -1.7      -1.5      -4.2
          Employees(d)                                                                    arc %              -2.6      -0.9      -0.9      -4.7
        Unemployment rate(e)                                                         annual average; %        9.5      10.8      12.7      15.7
IV.     Balance of payments
        Current account + Capital account                                                 % of GDP          -10.1      -9.4       -5.8       0.8
         Current account                                                                  % of GDP          -10.9     -10.6       -7.0      -1.5
            Goods account                                                                 % of GDP          -10.6     -11.1       -8.3      -5.2
         Capital account                                                                  % of GDP            0.8       1.1        1.2       2.3
V.      Exchange rates
        Nominal effective exchange rate index(f)                                            arc %             0.4      -1.5       -0.1      -1.3
        Real effective exchange rate index
          Adjusted for the relative unit labour costs(g)                                    arc %             0.1      -2.2       -1.6      -5.8
          Adjusted for the relative consumer price index                                    arc %            -0.9      -1.9        0.6      -1.0
VI.     Interest rates
          3-month Euribor                                                                  %, Dec.            0.7         1       1.4       0.2
          10-year ﬁxed rate Treasury bond yields                                           %, Dec.            3.9       6.5      13.1       7.3
          Interest rates on outstanding amounts of credit granted by MFIs(h)
            Loans to households for house purchase                                         %, Dec.              2       2.1       2.7       1.6
            Loans to non-ﬁnancial corporations                                             %, Dec.            3.3       3.8       5.1       4.5
            Deposits and deposit-like instruments up to 2 years                            %, Dec.            1.7       2.2       3.7       2.9
VII.    Stock price index (PSI-Geral)                                                  y-o-yrc 31-Dec.         40      -6.2     -20.4       7.7
VIII.   Bank deposits and loans to the resident sector(i)
         Deposits of non-ﬁnancial private sector                                         y-o-yrc Dec.         2.1       5.4       5.5       -3.8
         Loans(j)
           Non-monetary ﬁnancial institutions                                              arc Dec.           4.5       2.5       -7.2    -12.9
           Non-ﬁnancial corporations                                                       arc Dec.           1.7       0.7       -1.8     -3.8
           Households                                                                      arc Dec.           2.3         2       -2.2     -4.4
IX.     Public ﬁnances
        General government overall balance(k)                                            % of GDP           -10.2      -9.8      -4.4      -6.4
        General government primary balance                                               % of GDP            -7.3      -7.0      -0.4      -2.0
        Consolidated gross public debt                                                 Dec., % of GDP        83.7      94.0     108.3     123.6

Notes: (a) Compensation per employee including: collective bargaining aggreements, additional beneﬁts and employers’ social contributions;
Consistent series calculated using data and methodology from National Accounts base 2006. For more details see “Box 2 Relative unit labour
costs in Portugal: methodological issues and developments in the last decade”, Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin – Summer 2010. (b)
Private sector – economy as a whole excluding general government and corporate hospitals. (c) Aggregate savings for all economic agents
excluding the general government. (d) Data from INE National Accounts. (e) In 2011 the unemployment rate is inﬂuenced by a break in the
Labour Force Survey series. (f) A positive change denotes an appreciation in effective terms; a negative change denotes a depreciation. (g)
Relative unit labour costs in the total economy. A positive change denotes an increase in the relative costs of Portuguese producers. (h) Cal-
culated as the average of interest rates on outstanding amounts of credit granted and deposits taken by MFIs, denominated in euro, to/from
euro area residents, broken down by sector and/or purpose, in every maturity, weighted by the respective end-of-month amounts outstanding.
(i) End-of-month balances. (j) Annual rates of change are calculated on the basis of the ratio of end-of-month outstanding amounts of bank
loans adjusted for securitisation operations to monthly transactions derived from outstanding amounts adjusted for reclassiﬁcations, write-offs
and exchange rate and price revaluations. Whenever relevant, the ﬁgures are additionally adjusted for credit portfolios sales, as well as for other
operations with no impact in the sectors’ effective ﬁnancing. (k) According to the excessive deﬁcit procedure rules. arc: Annual rate of change;
rrc: Real rate of change; y-o-yrc: Year-on-year rate of change.
BOX | A COMPARISON BETWEEN THE ADJUSTMENT OF THE
PORTUGUESE ECONOMY AND PREVIOUS DOMESTIC AND
INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCES

The cyclical position of the Portuguese economy has deteriorated substantially in recent times, in the             25
context of the adjustment process of the macro-economic imbalances. The aim of this Box is to frame




                                                                                                                   Overview
recent developments in the Portuguese economy relying on two comparisons. The first is a comparison
between the recent recession in Portugal and similar events in advanced economies; the second confronts
the ongoing adjustment process with those that occurred in the aftermath of the balance-of-payments
crises and ensuing IMF-supported stabilization programs of 1977 and 1983.1


Comparison between the recent recession period in Portugal with historical recessions in
advanced economies

To put the recent developments in the Portuguese economy in a historical perspective compared to
other advanced economies, one has to start by identifying the main features of the economic cycles in
those economies. In this analysis, the downturn and expansions phases are characterized on the basis of
the turning points of economic activity – peaks and troughs – identified using quarterly changes in real
GDP. Table 1 summarises the main stylized facts of downturns and upswings in a sample of advanced
economies during the period between 1960 and 2008.2

Recessions are relatively frequent events in advanced economies. In a sample of 21 economies, 122
recession episodes were identified, which represents approximately 6 recessions on average per economy
over the last fifty years. However, there are considerable differences in terms of the frequency with which
recessions occur in the various countries. In the sample period, there was a reduction in the frequency and
severity of recessions as from the mid-1980s, period which has come to be known as “the great mode-
ration”. With the onset of the 2009 economic and financial crisis, however, this perception has changed.

On average, a recession in an advanced economy is characterized by a 2.7 per cent reduction in GDP
and lasts for 3.6 quarters (Table 1). A more detailed analysis shows that there are distinct patterns of
behaviour, depending on the underlying shock that triggered the recession. Recessions associated with
financial crises – defined as episodes where there is widespread turbulence in financial institutions and
in the functioning of financial markets – tend to cause larger declines in economic activity and to last
longer. The features of these recessions reflect the nature of the expansion period that preceded them,
frequently associated with over-optimistic expectations regarding growth of income and wealth. These
episodes are characterized by credit-booms, overheating in goods and services markets and the labour
market, bubbles in asset prices (including property) and a loss of external competitiveness. When expec-
tations are deceived, the rebalancing of economic agents’ balance sheets and the downward correction
of prices trigger sharp adjustments in consumption and investment. When recessions are synchronized
– defined as episodes in which 10 or more of the 21 countries in the sample are in recession simulta-
neously – the downturns are also longer and deeper. The occurrence of synchronized recessions in many
economies implies lower growth of the external demand directed to each economy, resulting in a worse
export behaviour than in less synchronized recessions. Obviously, the occurrence of highly synchronized
financial crises tends to worsen the pattern of adjustment detailed above.




1 The first stand-by arrangement with the IMF took place in 1978, but the main stabilization measures were agre-
  ed in 1977. It is for this reason that 1977 is taken as the reference year in the analysis.
2 This section is based on Chapter 3 “From recession to recovery: How soon and how strong?”, World Economic
  Outlook, IMF April 2009.
                                          Table 1
                                          MAIN STYLIZED FACTS OF RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES
      I                                                                                                 Duration                              Amplitude
                                                                                                   (number of quarters)              (percent change in real GDP)
                                                                                               Recessions        Recoveries(a)       Recessions        Recoveries(b)
26
                                          All
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                Mean                                              3.6                3.2                -2.7               4.1
                                                Standard deviation                                2.1                2.7                2.9                3.1
                                                Number of events                                  122                109
                                          By driver of recession
                                            Financial crises
                                                Mean                                              5.7                5.6                -3.4               2.2
                                                Standard deviation                                3.2                3.3                3.3                1.2
                                                Number of events                                  15                 11
                                          By extent of synchronization
                                            Highly synchronized
                                                Mean                                              4.5                4.2                -3.5               3.7
                                                Standard deviation                                2.5                3.6                3.0                1.7
                                                Number of events                                  37                 32
                                          Memorandum:
                                            Recessions associated with financial crises that
                                            are highly synchronized
                                                Mean                                              7.3                6.8                -4.8               2.8
                                          Sources: Eurostat, IMF (Chapter 3 “From recession to recovery: how soon and how strong?”, World Economic Outlook, April 2009)
                                          and Banco de Portugal.
                                          Notes: (a) Number of quarters before recovery to the level of previous peak. (b) Percent increase in real GDP after one year.



                                         For comparative purposes, the same procedure used in the previous analysis for the identification of
                                         economic cycles was applied to the Portuguese economy. According to this procedure, Portugal expe-
                                         rienced two recessions in the period from 2008 to 2012. Economic activity peaked in the first quarter
                                         of 2008, and was followed by a downturn that lasted until the first quarter of 2009. Afterwards, there
                                         was a recovery that ended in the third quarter of 2010. The second recession phase is still under way.
                                         It should be noted that the identification of the recession episodes (which reflects the selected proce-
                                         dure) does not preclude an integrated reading of their causes, both external − in particular, the major
                                         international financial crisis which was followed by the euro area sovereign debt crisis – and domestic.

                                         The first identified recession in the 2008-2012 period in Portugal was harsher and longer than the median
                                         recession in the historical sample in the advanced economies. This is explained to a large extent by the
                                         severity and the geographic extension of the financial crisis (Chart 1). The decline in economic activity in
                                         Portugal and in the euro area – 4.1 and 5.6 per cent, respectively, in accumulated terms – is broadly in
                                         line with downturns observed in past recessions associated with highly synchronized financial crises. In
                                         this recession episode, the downturn in GDP lasted for four quarters, somewhat less than the average
                                         duration in recessions associated with highly synchronized financial crises, which may be related to the
                                         impact of the counter-cyclical economic policies adopted both in Portugal and in many other countries.
                                         However this effect proved to be temporary, since the emergence of the sovereign debt crisis led there-
                                         after to the adoption of contractionary fiscal policies.

                                         As from the second quarter of 2009 real GDP recovered in Portugal. After four quarters, GDP had increased
                                         by an accumulated 2 per cent, a figure close to the average recovery in advanced economies following
                                         recessions associated with highly synchronized financial crises. This upturn proved to be short lived – it
                                         lasted only 6 quarters – and the pre-crisis levels of GDP were not even regained.

                                         During 2010, the country found it more and more difficult to access international financial markets –
                                         reflecting the increasing turmoil in euro area sovereign debt markets and the large macro-economic
                                         imbalances evidenced by Portugal – which eventually led to the request for international assistance in
 Chart 1
 COMPARISON OF THE RECENT RECESSION PERIOD IN PORTUGAL WITH HISTORICAL RECESSION
 EPISODES IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES | T= QUARTER OF THE PEAK OF THE CYCLE (GDP=100 IN T)


                                110
                                                                                                                                 27




                                                                                                                                 Overview
                                105



                                100



                                 95


                                          Portugal (T = Q1 2008)
                                 90
                                          Euro area (T=Q1 2008)
                                          Recessions associated with financial crises (IMF) - Median
                                          Other recessions (IMF) - Median
                                 85
                                      T    T+2    T+4    T+6     T+8   T+10 T+12 T+14 T+16 T+18
                                                                   Quarters


 Sources: Eurostat, IMF (Chapter 3 “From recession to recovery: how soon and how strong?”, World Economic Outlook, April 2009)
 and Banco de Portugal.


April 2011.3 Economic activity registered a contraction already in the final quarter of 2010 and continued
to decline over the following two years. In the last quarter of 2012, GDP stood 7 per cent below the level
observed in end 2010 (and more than 8 per cent below the level in 2008Q1). This accumulated decline
in Portuguese GDP exceeds by far the average magnitude of recessions in advanced economies. This
episode has now lasted for 9 quarters, which also exceeds the average duration of historical recessions
in advanced economies, whatever its cause or level of synchronization. However, one must note that
the level of heterogeneity around these averages is quite large.4 The recession in Portugal is turning out
to be particularly severe and protracted, due to the unusual combination of factors associated with it.


Comparison of the ongoing adjustment process with similar national episodes in the past

It is possible to look at the current adjustment process under way in the Portuguese economy and
compare it with earlier financing crises in the country. However, some important qualifications apply to
this comparison exercise. The first relates to the different macro-economic regimes in place in the periods
under consideration, namely in terms of institutional arrangements, productive and financial structures
and economic policy. The second has to do with differences in the programes. In the IMF-supported
stabilization programs of 1977 and 1983, the main objective was the reduction of the external imbalance.
The current financial assistance programme is much more comprehensive and complex in terms of the
targets to be attained and the measures to be put in place. These measures cover not only budgetary
consolidation targets, but also structural reforms needed to improve the economy’s potential growth
and competitiveness, along with policies geared to ensure an orderly deleveraging of the financial sector.
The adjustment measures also reflect the restrictions arising from the current institutional framework, in
particular, Portugal’s participation in the euro area.




3 In late April 2010, Portuguese banks ceased to have access to international wholesale markets for medium- to
  long-term debt.
4 There have been recessions considerably more severe and longer than the historical average. In extreme cases,
  there were accumulated falls in GDP exceeding 10 per cent between the peak and the trough in the cycle and
  recessions that lasted more than three years.
                                           Chart 2                                                              Chart 3
                                           INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION | AS A                             INDEBTEDNESS LEVELS | AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP
      I                                    PERCENTAGE OF GDP

                                           0                                                                   140          Public Debt
                                                                                                                            Non-financial corporations
28                                                                                                                          Households
                                          -20                                                                  120
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                          -40                                                                  100


                                          -60                                                                  80


                                          -80                                                                  60


                                         -100                                                                  40


                                         -120                                                                  20


                                         -140                                                                   0
                                                1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012         1980        1985       1990         1995   2000   2005   2010

                                           Source: Banco de Portugal.                                           Source: Banco de Portugal.


                                         However, the major difference between the adjustment episodes stems from the point of departure,
                                         which was much more unfavourable in the most recent case. The 2011 assistance programme reflects
                                         significantly larger accumulated macro-economic imbalances, especially unsustainable levels of external,
                                         public and private sector indebtedness (Charts 2 and 3). Furthermore, GDP growth in the Portuguese
                                         economy was extremely sluggish during the period before the current adjustment, which contrasts with
                                         developments in the previous adjustment periods.

                                         Correction of the macro-economic imbalances in the Portuguese economy requires an expenditure
                                         rebalancing. The unsustainable levels of the international investment position of the economy and of
                                         public and private indebtedness entail a longer and more substantial rebalancing of economic agents’
                                         balance sheets, which in turn implies a more marked adjustment in domestic demand than in the past.
                                         With domestic demand on the downturn, exports will have to be the driving force of the economic
                                         recovery. However, under the current circumstances, exports are more constrained than in previous
                                         adjustment periods, mainly due to the more adverse international economic situation and the need
                                         to compete in a rapidly changing global market. Furthermore, relative prices changes associated with
                                         the expenditure rebalancing is expected to be slower in the current context. At the time of the 1977
                                         and 1983 IMF-supported stabilization programs, these changes were made easier, in the short term, by
                                         devaluation, whereas in the current adjustment process, they are resulting from wage moderation and
                                         improvements in other factors of competitiveness. One must stress that devaluation is not a sustainable
                                         substitute for the structural reforms aimed at improving the functioning of the labour market and of
                                         the goods and services markets, which are essential for promoting competiveness and improving the
                                         potential growth of the economy.

                                         The general government deficit decreased sharply over the past two years, as a result of the restrictive
                                         stance of the fiscal policy (Chart 4). A reduction in the structural primary balance of close to 7 p.p. of
                                         GDP was recorded between 2010 and 2012. This adjustment, which is likely to continue, is already larger
                                         than that observed in the 1983-85 period. In any case, the current level of public indebtedness points
                                         to the need for a more pronounced and protracted consolidation effort so as to ensure fiscal primary
                                         surpluses allowing a reduction of public debt to sustainable levels.

                                         The fiscal consolidation process has a direct recessionary effect on domestic demand in the short term.
                                         The budgetary adjustment, which appears to be of a more permanent nature, is also contributing to a
                                         downward revision of private agents’ expectations regarding permanent income. This revision of expec-
tations, along with the need to correct the high levels of indebtedness, has led to a severe contraction
in domestic demand, which is much larger than those observed in previous adjustment periods.

The major difference is to be found in private consumption developments. Besides the factors just
mentioned, the more significant contraction in households’ expenditures in the current context also reflects
a more pronounced worsening of labour market conditions than in the past. However, the savings rate            29
has held firm, having even attained in 2012 its highest level since the start of the euro area – in contrast




                                                                                                               Overview
to what was seen in the 1977 and 1983 adjustment episodes, during which the savings rate declined.5
Recent developments in savings reflect an assessment that the current adjustment is of a more perma-
nent nature and the persistence of tight financing conditions. Uncertainty regarding the magnitude and
duration of the adjustment is probably also contributing to increase savings due to precautionary motives.

In contrast, the reduction in investment is more in line with what was seen in the 1980s. However, one
must mention that this item of expenditure had already recorded considerable falls in the years prior to
the request for financial assistance, which did not occur in previous adjustment periods. In the current
environment, the behaviour of this expenditure aggregate has been greatly affected by the deteriorating
outlook for world demand and even more so for domestic demand. Furthermore, the high levels of
indebtedness of non-financial corporations and of households and the tight credit conditions are also
contributing to depress private investment in the current adjustment episode.

Recent export growth has been lower than the one observed during the two IMF-supported stabilization
programs, which reflects, to a large extent, the much slower pace of expansion of external demand
directed to Portuguese producers in the current episode. The recent evolution of exports has implied
gains in market share, but these gains have been smaller than the ones seen in previous adjustments
episodes. Developments in relative unit labour costs show gains in price competitiveness, though more
limited than in previous episodes. Even so, the ongoing correction in relative unit labour costs has already
led to a reversal of the accumulated real appreciation observed since the start of the euro area.

The downward adjustment in imports has been more substantial than in the past, reflecting develop-
ments in global demand and, in particular domestic demand. The adjustment of the current and capital
account has been similar to what was seen in the 1970s and 80s. However, one must stress that progress
in reducing the external imbalance will have to be more sustained than in the past so as to bring the
international investment position back to a sustainable path.

In short, the present adjustment has led to much severe costs in terms of output and employment than
previous adjustment episodes. The analysis of recent developments in unemployment must take into
account the trend increase of the unemployment rate observed over the last decade, which is partly of
a structural nature.


Final remarks

The ongoing process of adjustment of the Portuguese economy stems from a set of very specific factors,
which are not comparable with the usual determinants of recessions in advanced economies or with the
factors that were present at the time of the previous IMF-supported stabilization programs. At the date
of request for financial assistance, the economy displayed a set of vulnerabilities, namely a structural
imbalance in public finances, a high level of private sector indebtedness and low potential economic
growth. Solving these problems necessarily implies an adjustment which will be more complex and will
have a more significant and protracted impact that those seen in the past both at the national level and,
on average, in other advanced economies.




5 See “Box 5.1 The rise in households’ saving rate in 2012: an explanation based on macro and microeconomic
  evidence”, of this Report.
                                          Chart 4
                                          PORTUGAL - COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS | T - 1ST YEAR OF THE
                                          PROGRAM (VARIABLE=100 IN T-1 AND DATA IN REAL TERMS, UNLESS OTHERWISE NOTED)


      I                                  125
                                                                        GDP
                                                                                                                5.0
                                                                                                                          Unemployment Rate (Change in p.p.)

                                         120
                                                                                                                4.0
30                                       115
                                         110                                                                    3.0
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         105
                                         100                                                                    2.0

                                          95
                                                                                                                1.0
                                          90
                                          85                                                                    0.0
                                                    T-1             T            T+1            T+2                        T-1               T           T+1             T+2

                                                                 Private Consumption                                                             GFCF
                                         125                                                                    130
                                         120                                                                    120
                                         115
                                                                                                                110
                                         110
                                                                                                                100
                                         105
                                                                                                                 90
                                         100
                                          95                                                                     80

                                          90                                                                     70
                                          85                                                                     60
                                                    T-1             T             T+1            T+2                        T-1              T            T+1            T+2

                                                           Exports of Goods and Services                                                External Demand(a)
                                         160                                                                    115
                                         150
                                         140                                                                    110

                                         130
                                                                                                                105
                                         120
                                         110
                                                                                                                100
                                         100
                                          90                                                                     95
                                                    T-1             T             T+1            T+2                        T-1              T            T+1            T+2

                                                          Nominal Effective Exchange Rate(b)                                       Real Effective Exchange Rate(b)
                                         110                                                                                                (based on ulc)
                                                                                                                110
                                         100
                                                                                                                100
                                          90
                                                                                                                 90
                                          80
                                                                                                                 80
                                          70
                                          60                                                                     70

                                          50                                                                     60

                                          40                                                                     50
                                                    T-1             T             T+1            T+2                        T-1              T            T+1            T+2

                                                    Current + Capital account Balance(c)                                 General Government Structural Primary
                                                         (as a percentage of GDP)                                         Balance(d) (as a percentage of GDP)
                                          2                                                                         2
                                          0
                                                                                                                    0
                                          -2       T-1              T            T+1             T+2
                                                                                                                           T-1               T           T+1             T+2
                                                                                                                 -2
                                          -4
                                          -6                                                                     -4
                                          -8
                                                                                                                 -6
                                         -10
                                                                                                                 -8
                                         -12
                                         -14                                                                    -10

                                                                                     1977                    1983                 2011 (e)

                                          Sources: ECB, INE, OECD and Banco de Portugal.
                                          Notes: (a) External demand for goods and services: source OECD in 1977, source ECB in 1983 and 2011. (b) There are differences
                                          in the computation methodology of the nominal and real effective exchange rates between the most recent period and the previous
                                          periods of IMF- supported stabilization programs, namely in terms of the currencies/countries coverage and respective weights. (c)
                                          Current account balance in 1977 and 1983.(d) The general government structural primary balance is corrected for cyclical effects.
                                          For the most recent period, it is also adjusted for temporary measures and special effects. There is a break in the series for the primary
                                          balance and in the methodology adopted for the computation of the cyclical component between the most recent period and the
                                          previous periods of IMF- supported stabilization programs. (e) Data for T+2 (=2013) correspond to projections by Banco de Portugal
                                          published in the Economic Bulletin - Spring 2013.
The international context adds further difficulties to the adjustment path, mainly reflecting the adverse
economic developments abroad and the need to compete in a changing global environment. The diffi-
culties and risks surrounding the adjustment process have been compounded by the high uncertainty
regarding the outlook for the world economy and the resolution of the euro area sovereign debt crisis.
This uncertainty has been reflected in the volatility of financial markets, in the erosion of economic agents’
                                                                                                                 31
confidence and in the weak and fragile recovery in global economic activity. In particular, the euro area




                                                                                                                 Overview
economy – a region that accounts for a significant share of the destination markets of Portuguese exports,
notwithstanding the geographic diversification recorded in recent years – slided into recession in 2012.
Furthermore, the ongoing adjustment has overlapped with a sectoral restructuring process over a longer
horizon, associated with the integration of the Portuguese economy in global markets.

One must stress that the adjustment programme was not only inevitable but also essential for the gradual
correction of the fundamental macro-economic imbalances from an inter-temporal perspective. Putting
into place the structural reforms set out in the adjustment programme should create the conditions for
the removal of the main structural obstacles to the potential growth of the economy, thus contributing
to bring indebtedness down to sustainable levels.
1. THE INTERNATIONAL FRAMEWORK                                                                              1

                                                                                                            33
World economic activity slows in 2012 across most advanced and emerging market




                                                                                                            The International Framework
economies

The external framework of the Portuguese economy in 2012 saw a slowdown in economic activity
across both advanced and emerging economies, though to a different degree. According to data from
the International Monetary Fund published in April, advanced economies’ Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
growth remained sluggish, coming in at 1.2 per cent, down by 0.4 percentage points (p.p.) than in 2011
(Table 1.1). Among the salient features in these economies were the stronger growth in the United States,
economic recovery in Japan, a slowdown in the United Kingdom and a fall in the GDP of the euro area,
Portugal’s main export market. Against a backdrop of lower demand in advanced economies, those of
emerging and developing markets also slowed. Even so, IMF data point to a growth of 5.1 per cent in
these economies, compared with 6.4 per cent in 2011. The slackening of momentum seems to have
been particularly marked in the countries of central and eastern Europe, exposed as they were to deve-
lopments in the euro area through commercial and financial ties. However, the same picture emerged
from China and Brazil, due to a large extent by faltering economic activity in their respective regions.

As a result of the world economic activity slowing, international trade decelerated. In the advanced
economies, imports were up by around 0.2 per cent in annual terms (3.5 per cent in 2011), with growth
being stronger in the first quarter. The import of goods in world terms rose 2.5 per cent during the
year, compared with 5.7 per cent in 2011. Trade flow from emerging market economies was still more
dynamic, though even so it slowed in year-on-year terms (Chart 1.1).




 Table 1.1
 GDP | REAL RATE OF CHANGE, IN PERCENTAGE
                                                                   2009       2010      2011      2012

 World economy                                                     -0.6       5.2        4.0       3.2
 Advanced economies                                                -3.5       3.0        1.6       1.2
    USA                                                            -3.1       2.4        1.8       2.2
    Japan                                                          -5.5       4.7       -0.5       2.0
    Euro area                                                      -4.4       2.0        1.4      -0.6
      Germany                                                      -5.1       4.2        3.0       0.7
      France                                                       -3.1       1.7        1.7       0.0
      Italy                                                        -5.5       1.7        0.4      -2.4
      Spain                                                        -3.7       -0.3       0.4      -1.4
    United Kingdom                                                 -4.0       1.8        1.0       0.3
 Emerging markets and developing economies                         2.7        7.6        6.4       5.1
    Central and Eastern Europe                                     -3.6       4.6        5.2       1.6
    Commonwealth of Independent States                             -6.4       4.9        4.8       3.4
      Russia                                                       -7.8       4.3        4.3       3.4
    Developing Asia                                                6.9        10.0       8.1       6.6
      China                                                        9.2        10.4       9.3       7.8
      India                                                        5.0        11.2       7.7       4.0
    Latin America                                                  -1.5       6.1        4.6       3.0
      Brazil                                                       -0.3       7.5        2.7       0.9
    Middle East and North Africa                                   3.0        5.5        4.0       4.8
    Sub-Saharan Africa                                             2.7        5.4        5.3       4.8
 Sources: Eurostat, IMF and Thomson Reuters.
 Note: IMF, World Economic Outlook April 2013.
                                          Chart 1.1
                                          VOLUME OF IMPORTS OF GOODS
      I
                                                                                            200

34
                                                                                            180
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                            160               Emerging and developing


                                                                         Index (2005=100)
                                                                                                              economies

                                                                                            140
                                                                                                                                                    World

                                                                                            120



                                                                                            100                                                     Euro area
                                                                                                              Advanced economies


                                                                                             80
                                                                                              Jan05   Jan06     Jan07   Jan08   Jan09   Jan10   Jan11   Jan12



                                          Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, Thomson Reuters and Banco de Portugal calculations.




                                         Decisions taken by European authorities play a part in dampening volatility in financial
                                         markets

                                         The level of uncertainty in the international economy eased during the second half of 2012, though it
                                         remained high (Chart 1.2). In the early part of the year, high level of uncertainty was associated with the
                                         redenomination risk in the euro area and the capacity of certain countries to reach their budgetary targets,
                                         in the back of weak economic growth. From the second quarter of the year, the measures announced
                                         by European authorities and by national governments played a part in curbing volatility in the financial
                                         markets and in the slight improvement in the prospects for growth (Chart 1.3).

                                         Monetary policy decisions contributed to these moves (see “Section 2.1 ECB monetary policy”, in this
                                         Report), in particular the Council of the ECB announcement, in early August, of a new programme to
                                         buy sovereign debt in the secondary market. Prior to this declaration, there was a statement from the
                                         President of the ECB, reinforcing the idea that a solution to the crisis in the euro area would come through
                                         greater European integration. He also stated the irreversibility of the euro area and the intention of the
                                         ECB, within its mandate, to safeguard the single monetary policy and to preserve the euro.

                                         The maintenance of high risk levels in the financial markets is correlated with the continuation of the
                                         sovereign debt crisis in the euro area and the bidirectional interaction between sovereign risk and risk of
                                         the banking system. The curbing of such interaction mechanisms is essential to ensure financial stability
                                         in the euro area and to guarantee the normalisation of the economies’ financing conditions. In this
                                         context, the European Council agreed in June 2012 to deepen and accelerate the process of European
                                         integration in the financial domain, in particular through the creation of a banking union. Accordingly,
                                         the European Commission put forward a proposal for a single body to oversee the euro area banks,
                                         with the ECB holding the remit for overall supervision which should be in place in mid-2014, unless it
                                         decided a delay for system operation reasons. On March 2013, an agreement was reached between the
                                         Council and the European Parliament to set out the regulations governing the role of the ECB in direct
             Chart 1.2                                                                   Chart 1.3
             UNCERTAINTY LEVEL ASSOCIATED TO                                             FINANCIAL MARKET RISK INDICATORS
             ECONOMIC FORECAST
                                                                                                                                                           1
                    0.80                                                                                       Equity volatility
                                US       Euro area
                                                                                                                - euro area                                35
                                                                                                                1.2
                    0.70




                                                                                                                                                           The International Framework
                                                                                                EUR/USD            1               Bonds volatility
                                                                                                 volatility      0.8                - euro area
                    0.60
                                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                 0.4
Percentage points




                    0.50                                                                                                                       iTraxx
                                                                                                                 0.2                      (Europe): CDS
                                                                                              EMBI                 0                          spreads
                    0.40
                                                                                                                                            investment
                                                                                                                                          grade, 5 years
                    0.30
                                                                                            CDX IG (US):
                    0.20                                                                    CDS spreads                            Equity volatility
                                                                                              investment                                - US
                                                                                            grade, 5 years
                    0.10
                                                                                                               Bonds volatility
                                                                                                                   - US
                    0.00
                       Jan-00   Jan-02    Jan-04     Jan-06   Jan-08   Jan-10   Jan-12            31-05-2012       26-07-2012       27-03-2013



             Sources: Consensus Forecast and Banco de Portugal calcula-                  Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and Banco de Portugal
             tions.                                                                      calculations.
             Notes: Estimated measure based on the standard deviation                    Notes: Ratio of the values of the indicator on the mentioned
             of individual forecasts of Consensus Forecast of GDP annual                 date to 30 December 2011.
             variation rate. A weighted and moving average was used so
             that the forecast reflects the following 12 months since the
             publication date.




supervision of the most important credit institutions, with national supervisory bodies responsible for
the direct supervision of the remaining institutions.1


Decline in sovereign debt yields, in the context of easing in the perception of sovereign risk

The international financial markets reacted favourably to the European authorities’ decisions, and a
fall in the sovereign debt yields for those euro area countries most affected by the sovereign debt crisis
followed (Chart 1.4). The bond markets were therefore reflecting a fall in the risk perception for these
countries, in a reaction to ECB decisions and suggesting greater confidence in these countries being able
to reach their budgetary targets. The differential between these rates and those for Germany declined
in most of euro area countries.

There is still, however, some uncertainty over the capacity to implement the measures required, both at
a European and a national level, along with the smoothing out of instability in a number of European
countries, which could trigger negative contagion effects over economic agents’ confidence. In 2013,
turmoil in the markets returned, following the election results in Italy and the negotiations around the
adjustment programme set out for Cyprus. A credible response from European authorities on these issues
would contribute to reduce the high level of uncertainty and to the improvement of the prospects for
economic growth, even in the short term, easing the adjustment process in Portugal.



1 In order to ensure financial stability, a banking union should also include a European fund to provide a resolution
  for banks and a common deposit protection scheme. The European resolution mechanism should be proposed
  by the European Commission after June 2013. As for the deposit guarantee scheme, the guidelines set out by
  the European Council on 13 and 14 December 2012 point towards a European directive to be put in place at
  national level. For more details on the composition of a banking union, see “Box 2.1. The Banking Union” in the
  Economic Bulletin- Autumn 2012.
                                          Chart 1.4
                                          10-YEAR GOVERNMENT BOND YIELDS | SPREADS AGAINST GERMANY, BASIS POINTS
      I
                                                                                    3000        Italy                                                4000
                                                                                                Austria
36                                                                                              Belgium                                              3500
                                                                                    2500        Netherlands
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                France
                                                                                                                                                     3000
                                                                                                Finland
                                                                                    2000        Portugal
                                                                                                                                                     2500




                                                                                                                                                            Basis points
                                                                                                Spain

                                                                     Basis points
                                                                                                Ireland
                                                                                    1500        Greece (rhs)                                         2000


                                                                                                                                                     1500
                                                                                    1000

                                                                                                                                                     1000

                                                                                    500
                                                                                                                                                     500


                                                                                      0                                                              0
                                                                                      Jan-10   Jul-10   Jan-11   Jul-11   Jan-12   Jul-12   Jan-13



                                          Source: Thomson Reuters.




                                         Macro-economic adjustments varied across euro area countries

                                         In the context of elevated heterogeneity in the economic performance among advanced economies, the
                                         macro-economic conditions in 2012 were particularly adverse for the Portuguese economy and some of
                                         its main trading partners. In particular, the slowdown in the euro area, where aggregate GDP and the
                                         GDP of several countries declined, inhibited growth in the Portuguese economy. In intra-annual terms, the
                                         euro area observed an increasingly higher GDP reduction. Notwithstanding, the easing of international
                                         financial markets volatility, after ECB’s President speech, and the announcement of monetary policy
                                         non-conventional measures had a positive impact through risk reduction.

                                         In spite of the positive moves of last year, confidence among economic agents in the euro area flowed
                                         back more slowly than in previous recessions (Charts 1.5 and 1.6). This is in line with the behaviour
                                         observed in previous financial and banking crises, where it was typical to see considerable contractions
                                         in output and a slower momentum in economic recovery.

                                         In the main destinations for Portuguese exports, Spain, Germany and France, domestic demand faltered.
                                         In Spain, the economic contraction was affected by the consolidation process that was in progress and
                                         by the unfavourable financial conditions that still held sway. The result was a downswing in domestic
                                         demand across the board – public and private consumption and investment. Fiscal results were condi-
                                         tioned by the financial assistance programme for recapitalizing financial institutions, agreed with the
                                         Eurogroup on 20 July. In Germany, GDP growth in 2012 slipped somewhat in the wake of a decline in
                                         domestic demand, with a particularly negative performance from investment. Net exports had a positive
                                         contribution to GDP growth, higher than in the previous year. This result was helped by the decline in
                                         imports, reflecting the increase in uncertainty and a decline in confidence among economic agents.
                                         Besides more favourable financing conditions in Germany than in other euro area countries (Chart 1.4),
                                         Germany was also influenced by the fiscal adjustment, in line with most countries in the euro area (Chart
                                         1.7). In France, GDP stagnated, as a result of a negative contribution from domestic demand.
          Chart 1.5                                                                                                                                                 Chart 1.6
          ECONOMIC SENTIMENT INDICATORS                                                                                                                             ECONOMIC SENTIMENT INDICATORS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                120                   Euro area                                                                                                                             120                                                                                             Germany

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                37
                110                                                                                                                                                         110




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The International Framework
                100                                                                                                                                                         100
Index (Q=100)




                                                                                                                                                            Index (Q=100)
                90                                                                                                                                                          90



                80                                                                                                                                                          80



                70                                                                                                                                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008 / 09
                                                                                                       2008 / 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1992 / 93
                                                                                                       1992 / 93
                60                                                                                                                                                          60
                     Q-8   Q-4   Q   Q+4    Q+8                       Q+12                  Q+16                  Q+20                                                             Q-8                           Q-4                       Q                      Q+4           Q+8   Q+12   Q+16   Q+20



          Sources: European Commission and Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI).
          Notes: Q represents the quarter of the previous peak in the beginning of the recession, identified by GDP developments. The peak
          dates in the chart are 1992 Q1 and 2009 Q2, according to ECRI. The economic sentiment indicator corresponds to the weighted
          average of consumer, industry, services, construction, and retail confidence indicators.




In terms of fiscal policy, 2012 is marked by close synchronization resulting from the general
move to correct accumulated imbalances

In 2012 the structural primary balance of public administrations across the euro area (Chart 1.7) stood
at 1.0 per cent of GDP, according to estimates from the European Commission, which is a clear impro-
vement on a year earlier (-0.5 per cent). The improvement in this aggregate stemmed from the highly
restrictive budgetary policies put in place by the main euro area economies.




          Chart 1.7
          STRUCTURAL PRIMARY BALANCE IN THE EURO AREA

                                                                 6                                                                                                                                                  2011                              2012


                                                                 4


                                                                 2
                                             In percentage GDP




                                                                 0


                                                                 -2


                                                                 -4


                                                                 -6
                                                                                                      Estonia



                                                                                                                          Greece



                                                                                                                                           France

                                                                                                                                                    Italy

                                                                                                                                                                 Cyprus




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Slovakia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Finland
                                                                      Euro area

                                                                                  Belgium

                                                                                            Germany



                                                                                                                Ireland



                                                                                                                                   Spain




                                                                                                                                                                              Luxembourg



                                                                                                                                                                                                   Netherlands



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Portugal (a)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                           Malta




          Sources: European Commission and Banco de Portugal
          Note: (a) For Portugal, it is used the figure calculated by the Banco de Portugal using the Eurosystem methodology and corrected
          with special factors.
                                         In addition, the first notification on excessive deficit procedures in 2012 indicate that only six countries
                                         in the euro area posted deficits below the reference figure of 3 per cent of GDP. The expectations are
                                         that restrictive budgetary policies will remain in place across a wide spectrum of euro area countries,
      I                                  bearing in mind that there are currently five member states with a correction deadline in 2013 (Austria,
                                         Netherlands, Slovenia, Slovakia and France) and other countries with longer deadlines, among them
38
                                         Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece.
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         This budgetary synchronization in the euro area countries contributed to the general decline of domestic
                                         demand across the area. In particular, investment in residential construction remained sluggish, given the
                                         on-going corrections in the housing market in a number of euro area countries. Austria was an exception,
                                         with house prices up in real terms, along with Germany, though here the move was not so pronounced
                                         (Chart 1.8). In the case of the French residential market, a small correction is observed following the
                                         strong increases in the last decade. In line with the contraction in economic activity, and in a more
                                         meaningful way in those economies conditioned by adjustment processes, there was a substantial rise in
                                         the jobless figures. This has become particularly worrying where long-term unemployment is concerned.
                                         The unemployment rate in the euro area stood at 11.8 per cent in December 2012 (compared with 10.7
                                         per cent a year earlier), and this is a level that is particularly high in historical terms (Chart 1.9).

                                         In the euro area, the current and capital account balance increased to 1.4 per cent of GDP in 2012, resul-
                                         ting from a differentiated evolution among the countries. The adjustment to correct external imbalances
                                         occurred in most countries with current and capital account deficits. In contrast, most of the countries
                                         with surpluses reinforced their position, with Germany salient among them. The adjustments needed to
                                         correct external imbalances in euro area countries became more urgent for those with an external deficit
                                         and where access to markets for financing sovereign debt was costly and difficult. During the year, there
                                         was a fall in the disparity between countries in terms of the current and capital account balance, even
                                         though the figure remained high (Charts 1.10 and 1.11).




                                          Chart 1.8                                                                                          Chart 1.9
                                          REAL HOUSE PRICES | INDEX 2000=100                                                                 UNEMPLOYMENT RATE

                                         210          Euro area                                                                                                   5        Unemployment rate developments in the euro area during
                                                      Germany                                                                                                                                   recessions
                                                                                                               Percentual change since the end of the recession




                                                      France
                                         190          Italy
                                                      Spain                                                                                                       4
                                                      Netherlands
                                         170          Austria
                                                      Portugal                                                                                                    3
                                         150          Ireland


                                         130                                                                                                                      2


                                         110
                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                          90
                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2008 / 09
                                          70
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Average of previous recoveries

                                          50                                                                                                                      -1
                                               2000   2001    2003   2004   2006   2007   2009   2010   2012                                                           0     2     4      6       8      10     12      14     16   18
                                                Q1     Q3      Q1     Q3     Q1     Q3     Q1     Q3     Q1                                                                            Quarters since the end of the recession



                                          Sources: Eurostat and ECB.                                                                         Sources: ECB, ECRI, and Eurostat.
                                          Note: House prices deflated by the consumer price index. Prices                                    Note: Average, maximum and minimum correspond to the
                                          in France and in the Netherlands refer to existing dwellings.                                      cycles since 1973, excluding the current.
                                          In the remaining countrises it refers to all dwellings (new and
                                          existing). In Germany, data before 2003 is annual.
             Chart 1.10                                                                     Chart 1.11
             CURRENT AND CAPITAL ACCOUNT BALANCE |                                          CURRENT AND CAPITAL ACCOUNT BALANCE |
             EURO AREA COUNTRIES UNDER PRESSURE                                             EURO AREA COUNTRIES WITH HIGH CREDIT RATING
                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                   12    Euro area        Belgium          Germany     France
                                                                                                                                                                  39
                     6
                                                                                                         Netherlands      Austria          Finland




                                                                                                                                                                  The International Framework
                     4
                                                                                                   10
                     2
                                                                                                    8
                     0




                                                                               In percentage GDP
In percentage GDP




                     -2                                                                             6

                     -4
                                                                                                    4
                     -6

                     -8                                                                             2

                    -10
                                                                                                    0
                    -12                             Euro area    Ireland
                                                    Greece       Spain                             -2
                    -14                             Italy        Portugal
                    -16                                                                            -4
                          2008   2009       2010       2011       2012                                  2008           2009         2010        2011       2012



             Sources: Eurostat and Banco de Portugal calculations.                          Sources: Eurostat and Banco de Portugal calculations.
             Note: For the euro area data only include extra euro area tran-                Note: For the euro area data only include extra euro area tran-
             sactions.                                                                      sactions.

In contrast with the recession in the euro area and the slowdown in the United Kingdom,
economic growth in the US intensified

In the United Kingdom, the economic slowdown in 2012 resulted, to a large extent, from the negative
contribution of net exports, in a context of increased unit labour costs and a decrease in productivity.
Domestic demand had a positive performance, in all its components, and an improvement in economic
sentiment was observed.

In the United States, economic activity in 2012 recovered in year-on-year terms, bucking the forecast
of a slowdown. The recovery resulted from a positive contribution from domestic demand, in particular
from private consumption and investment. One of the salient features was the continuing recovery in
the housing market, with residential investment pushing up the GDP growth rate. Over the year, in fact,
house prices reached levels comparable with 2007. In contrast with these favourable developments were
favourable, growth in employment was less than the average growth in recent recessions (Chart 1.12).

The prospects for economic growth in the United States were affected by uncertainty over budgetary
policy, in particular in the last quarter of the year, as a number of budgetary stimuli enacted during the
financial crisis reached their revocation date. On the last day of the year an agreement was reached
allowing for an extension of part of the tax reduction. However, starting in 2013, the automatic trigge-
ring of restrictions on public spending and the absence of a medium-term commitment on budgetary
consolidation may hamper economic growth. IMF figures point to a budgetary deficit of 8.7 per cent of
GDP for 2012 and the gross public debt standing at 107.2 per cent of GDP.


Robust growth in economic activity in emerging market economies

Angola, China and Brazil are among the main countries for Portuguese exports outside of the European
Union and the United States. Economic growth in these countries remained high, although with different
dynamics. In Angola, according to the IMF, GDP was up by 8.4 per cent for the year (compared with 3.9
per cent in 2011), with the IMF programme for macro-economic adjustment coming to an end during
the year. In China, GDP growth slowed from 9.3 per cent to 7.8 per cent year-on-year, but there was
                                         still solid economic growth. In Brazil, in contrast, the economy drifted from 2.7 per cent to 0.9 per cent,
                                         at a pace that was greater than the overall picture for Latin America.

      I
                                         Commodity prices are down and world inflation slowed
40
                                         With the world economy slowing, commodity prices were down in 2012 in annual average terms. This
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         resulted from numerous factors, among them the steeper decline in the prices for non-energy products,
                                         visible above all in dollar prices, as a result of the fact that the euro depreciated by around 8 per cent
                                         against the US dollar during the year. Commodity prices were still high, however, in historical terms, and
                                         only a small correction occurred, following the rises of the previous two years. Prices for energy-related
                                         products remained high during the year, distressed by some turbulence on the supply side following the
                                         EU embargo on oil imports from Iran and the break in exports from Libya.

                                         Average annual growth in consumer prices was more moderate than a year before (Chart 1.13). Although
                                         there was an overall downward trend in inflation, there is a significant difference in the levels across
                                         regions, with relatively higher rates in emerging market economies. In emerging market economies,
                                         inflation stood at 6 per cent in average annual terms, down 0.8 percentage points compared to 2011.
                                         In advanced economies inflation stood at 1.9 per cent, compared with 2.7 per cent a year earlier. This
                                         slowdown was common to most economies. The exceptions to this were some economies in the euro
                                         area and the slight rise in Japan, where there were no falls in prices in average terms. In the aggregated
                                         euro area, inflation stood at 2.3 per cent in annual average terms.


                                         In the context of volatility reduction, stock market indexes were up on the year, and the euro
                                         depreciated in effective nominal terms

                                         Stock market indexes in the main economies were up year-on-year, in particular in Japan and in 2013
                                         in the United States, with monetary authorities announcing expansionist monetary policy measures and
                                         government bond purchasing programmes (see “Box 2.1. Recent changes in monetary policy strategies
                                         in the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan”, in this Report). This panorama could suggest that


                                                                                 Chart 1.12                                                                                    Chart 1.13
                                                                                 EMPLOYMENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE UNITED                                                         INFLATION
                                                                                 STATES | COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS CYCLES

                                                                                            20                 Current cycle (Trough: jun-09)                                                 World economy
                                                                                                               Average of previous recessions                                                 Advanced economies
                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                              Emerging markets and developing economies
                                                                                                                                                                                              Euro area
                                         Percentual change since the end of the recession




                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                    8


                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                       Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                    6


                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                    2



                                                                                            -5 0   4    8     12    16    20     24    28    32    36     40      44                0
                                                                                                       Months since the end of recession, according to the NBER                      2005   2006    2007     2008     2009     2010       2011   2012



                                                                                 Sources: National Bureau of Economic Research, Thomson                                        Source: Thomson Reuters.
                                                                                 Reuters and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                                                                 Note: The average, peak and trough correspond to the cycles
                                                                                 since 1950, excluding the current cycle.
there will be an increase in demand in those advanced economies where there is a higher return. According
to the Morgan Stanley Capital International indexes, stock markets in emerging market economies were
up, though to a lower extent than the global aggregate figure. In the euro area, the rise was more clearly
visible in countries with a higher credit rating and, on the other side, the fall in the Cyprus index, with   1
the Spanish index falling too, though to a lesser extent. The situation in the latter was exacerbated by
                                                                                                              41
the downward move in the banking sector, in spite of the recapitalization of financial institutions agreed




                                                                                                              The International Framework
under the financial assistance programme. In the foreign exchange market, the euro depreciated against
its main trade partners in average annual terms. The result was a depreciation in effective nominal terms.
In end-of-period data, between the end of 2011 and the end of 2012 the euro appreciated marginally
against the dollar and the effective nominal depreciation was very slight.
BOX 1.1 | RECENT CHANGES IN MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY IN THE
UNITED STATES, THE UNITED KINGDOM AND JAPAN

                                                                                                                 1
The international ﬁnancial crisis, in particular after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September
2008, triggered cuts in the ofﬁcial interest rates of the main central banks to levels close to zero and         43
led to an increasing deployment of unconventional monetary policy measures over the last ﬁve years.




                                                                                                                 The International Framework
These measures, allied with the signiﬁcant changes to the operational framework of some of the main
central banks in 2012 and early 2013, represent a substantive change in the monetary policy strategy
of the main advanced economies.

One ﬁrst set of changes is related to the modiﬁcation of the quantitative deﬁnition of price stability and
to some increased ﬂexibility in the relevant time horizon for monetary policy. In this context, it is worth
mentioning the speciﬁcation by the US Federal Reserve of a 2 per cent goal for inﬂation in the long-run
and of an estimate in the range of 5.2 and 6 per cent for the long-run unemployment rate (Table1)1. In
turn, the Bank of Japan introduced an explicit target of 2 per cent for inﬂation, replacing the previous goal
of 1 per cent.2 Where the Bank of England is concerned, the most recent remit for the Monetary Policy
Committee conﬁrmed the 2 per cent inﬂation target, reﬂecting the primacy of price stability over the
government’s goals for growth and employment.3 However, regarding the relevant horizon for pursuing
the main objective, it is explicitly recognized in the Bank of England’s remit that inﬂation might depart
temporarily from the target due to shocks with repercussions persisting over some time. In these cases,
the reduction of the inﬂation deviation from the target should take into account the potential risks for
macroeconomic and ﬁnancial stability.

A second set of changes relates to monetary policy instruments, given the low level of ofﬁcial interest
rates – traditionally deemed a sufﬁcient instrument for the achievement of the monetary policy objective.
Ofﬁcial rates near the lower bound do not necessarily mean that monetary policy becomes ineffective.
Some central banks have sought to steer agents’ expectations regarding the path of interest rates by using
a longer-term perspective when communicating about the monetary policy stance (forward guidance).
That is the case of the US Federal Reserve, which in December 2008 started by announcing that the
low level of ofﬁcial interest rates would be held for an extended period of time, and subsequently, for
a speciﬁc time horizon. In December 2012, the Federal Reserve went a little further and made future
monetary policy conditional on the state of the economy. It announced that the low level of interest
rate would remain adequate at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6.5 per cent,
provided that projected inﬂation over 1 to 2 years did not exceed 2.5 per cent and that longer-term
inﬂation expectations remained anchored.4 This type of communication strategy is currently under study
in the Bank of England, as required by the recent remit issued by the government, and the results of the
assessment should be presented in August 2013.

The low level of interest rate also implied that unconventional liquidity provision measures gained incre-
ased relevance as instruments of monetary policy. In this context, 2012 was marked by the adoption
of a series of new measures, such as the Bank of England’s Funding for Lending Scheme, a new asset
purchase programme by the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan’s Stimulating Bank Lending Facility
(Table 1).5 More recently, in April 2013, the Bank of Japan announced a change in the operational



1 For more information, see the FOMC statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy, 25 January 2012.
2 For more information, see Introduction of the Price Stability Target, 22 January 2013.
3 The Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee’s remit is restated annually by the United Kingdom’s govern-
  ment. For more information, see Remit for the Monetary Policy Committee, 20 March 2013.
4 For more information, see Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement, 12 December 2012.
5 The ECB announced the outright monetary transactions programme for short-term public debt securities (OMT).
  For a more detailed description of these measures, see “Box 1.2 Non-standard Monetary Policy in major advan-
  ced economies”, Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin - Autumn 2012.
                                         target of monetary policy, with the ofﬁcial interest rate being replaced by the monetary base (currency
                                         in circulation and deposits held at the central bank), which will be doubled over the next two years. The
                                         Bank of Japan also announced a massive asset purchase programme, including long-term public debt6,
I                                        and that all the measures adopted will be maintained for as long as necessary to attain the 2 per cent
                                         inﬂation target.
44
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                             Table 1
                                             MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY IN THE UNITED STATES, THE UNITED KINGDOM AND JAPAN
                                             Monetary authority                Federal Reserve                Bank of England                Bank of Japan
                                             Legal mandate                     To promote the goals of        To maintain price stability,   To achieve price stability,
                                                                               maximum employment,            and subject to that, to        thereby contributing to the
                                                                               stable prices and moderate     support the government’s       sound development of the
                                                                               long-term interest rates       objectives for growth and      national economy
                                                                                                              employment
                                             Quantiﬁed objective               Long-run inﬂation goal         Annual inﬂation rate = 2%,     Inﬂation target = 2%, at the
                                                                               = 2%                           at all times                   earliest possible time with
                                                                               There is no ﬁxed goal for                                     a time horizon of about 2
                                                                               maximum employment                                            years
                                                                               but the longer-run normal
                                                                               rate of unemployment is
                                                                               estimated to stand between
                                                                               5.2% and 6%
                                             Inﬂation measure                  Annual change of the priva-    Annual change of the Con-      Year-on-year change of
                                                                               te consumption deﬂator         sumer Price Index (CPI)        the CPI
                                             Ofﬁcial interest rate             Federal funds rate             Bank rate                      Uncollateralized overnight
                                                                                                                                             call rate
                                               Current level                   0% - 0.25%                     0.5%                           0% - 0.10%
                                               Last change                     -(75-100) b.p. (Dec-08)        -50 p.b. (Mar-09)              -(0-10) b.p. (Oct-10)
                                               Recent peak                     5.25% (Jun-06)                 5.75% (Jul-07)                 0.5% (Feb-07)
                                             Main unconventional measu-        Asset purchase programme,      Asset purchase programme,      Asset purchase programme
                                             res currently in place            mainly agency mortgage-        mostly government debt         (from May-10) replaced
                                                                               -backed securities, at a       or gilts in a total amount     by Quantitative and Qua-
                                                                               pace of 40 billion USD per     of 325 billion GBP (from       litative Monetary Easing
                                                                               month, to be maintained        Mar-09).                       which includes doubling
                                                                               until there is a substantial                                  the monetary base in the
                                                                               improvement in the labour                                     next two years at a annual
                                                                               market (from Sep-12).                                         pace of 60-70 trillion JPY
                                                                                                                                             and the purchase of long-
                                                                                                                                             -term government bonds,
                                                                                                                                             exchange-traded funds and
                                                                                                                                             real estate investment trusts
                                                                                                                                             (from Apr-13)
                                                                               Use of communication to        Funding for Lending            Loan support programme:
                                                                               guide economic agents’         Scheme, launched with          includes the Growth-
                                                                               expectations of the future     the UK Treasury, aimed at      -Supporting Funding
                                                                               policy rate (forward gui-      stimulating bank lending to    Facility, that provides 1 to 4
                                                                               dance).                        the economy. The scheme        years loans to ﬁnancial ins-
                                                                                                              provides funding for banks     titutions for investment or
                                                                                                              for an extended period at      lending with the aim of at
                                                                                                              below market costs (Jul-12     strengthening the Japanese
                                                                                                              to Jan-14).                    economy (May-10) and the
                                                                                                                                             Stimulating Bank Lending
                                                                                                                                             Facility that provides long-
                                                                                                                                             -term funds at a low interest
                                                                                                                                             rate to ﬁnancial institutions
                                                                                                                                             with aim of promoting
                                                                                                                                             credit to the real economy
                                                                                                                                             (Oct-12).
                                             Central bank’s balance sheet - total assets
                                               Jun-07                          6% of GDP                      6% of GDP                      19% of GDP
                                               Dec-12                          18% of GDP                     27% of GDP                     34% of GDP
                                               Change between Jun-07           230%                           400%                           60%
                                               and Dec-12
                                             Sources: Bank of England, Bank of Japan, US Federal Reserve and Banco de Portugal.



                                         6      The average maturity of public debt securities on the balance sheet of the central bank is likely to increase from
                                               3 years to nearly 7 years. For more information, see Introduction of the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary
                                               Easing, 4 April 2013.
2. ECB monetary policy and monetary and financial                                                                2
   conditions in the Portuguese economy
                                                                                                                 45




                                                                                                                 ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
   2.1. ECB monetary policy

In the context of low and anchored inflation expectations, economic slowdown and weak performance
of monetary aggregates and credit in the euro area, the ECB maintained the accommodative monetary
policy stance of the Eurosystem during the year, through its conventional instruments. In parallel, in order
to ensure adequate transmission of monetary policy to euro area economy, in a context of instability
and fragility of financial markets, the ECB adopted a wide variety of non-conventional monetary policy
measures, of temporary nature.

In respect of conventional measures, the Governing Council of the ECB decided, in July 2012, to reduce
by 25 basis points its monetary policy interest rates: the interest rate for main financing operations fell
to 0.75 per cent and interest rates for marginal deposit facilities and for lending facilities were reduced
to 0 per cent and 1.5 per cent, respectively. This decision consolidated the historically low level for the
official interest rates and was justified in the context of lesser inflationary pressures on the relevant time
horizon for monetary policy, and of risks for economic growth in the euro area. Within this framework,
the expectations for inflation were firmly anchored throughout the year, and in line with the price stabi-
lity aim, i.e. maintaining inflation rates, measured by the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. During 2012, the year-on-year HICP change rate fell
from 2.7 per cent in January to 2.2 per cent in December, and this trend extended into the first months
of 2013. The persistence of annual inflation figures above 2 per cent derived from the dynamics of energy
prices, the depreciation of the euro and by increases in administrative prices and indirect taxes in some
euro area countries as part of their budgetary consolidation processes.


In 2012, there was a persistently high level of bank refinancing through the ECB

In respect of non-conventional measures, the ECB decided, in December 2012, that the main refinancing
operations (MRO) would continue to work through fixed-rate auctions with total placement of demand
as long as this was necessary and at least until the end of July 2013. In relation to longer-term refinancing
operations (LTRO), the interest rate will be the average of the rates for MROs prevailing at the time. Still
in what concerns non-conventional measures, on 29 February 2012 the second 3-year maturity liquidity
providing operation took place. This was two months after the first and demand high. In the context of
elevated recourse to the ECB refinancing of the financial system, liquidity condition were very accomo-
dation and therefore contributed to the convergence of the EONIA interest rate to the marginal lending
facility interest rate (Chart 2.1.1). This lending with 3-year maturity carried the option of early repayment
after 12 months; for the December operation, this option was exercised since end of January 2013,
while for the February operation, the reimbursement possibility started in the end of February 2013.
As a result, there was a slight decrease on the outstanding amounts in these operations (Chart 2.1.3).

Eurosystem refinancing remained high, in particular for banks in those countries most impacted by the
sovereign debt crisis, although some reduction is observed since mid 2013. On the other hand, interest
rates in the money market fell substantially, leading to a narrower differential between non-collateralized
(Euribor) and collateralized (Eurepo), rates, more clearly visible in longer-term operations (Chart 2.1.4).
This situation suggests that money market conditions are returning to normal, since it reveals a lower
perception of risk implicit in unsecured operations. However, the euro money market survey conducted
by the ECB showed that the turnover in the unsecured market continued to fall in 2012 and a large
                                                    Chart 2.1.1                                                                                                  Chart 2.1.2
                                                    RECOURSE TO EUROSYSTEM OPERATIONS AND                                                                        RECOURSE TO LONG TERM REFINANCING
                                                    INTEREST RATES                                                                                               OPERATIONS
      I
                                                                                  Deposit facility                                                                     1200          36-month
46                                                                                Excess reserves                                                                                    12-month
                                                          1000                    EONIA (rhs)                                     2.0                                                6-month
                                                                                  Deposit facility interest rate (rhs)
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                                                                                                     3-month
                                                                                                                                                                       1000
                                                          800                                                                     1.6

                                                                                                                                                                       800
                                         Billions euros




                                                          600                                                                     1.2




                                                                                                                                                      Billions euros
                                                                                                                                         Percentage
                                                                                                                                                                       600
                                                          400                                                                     0.8


                                                                                                                                                                       400
                                                          200                                                                     0.4


                                                            0                                                                     0.0                                  200



                                                          -200                                                                    -0.4                                      0
                                                             Jan.09      Jan.10          Jan.11           Jan.12         Jan.13                                             Jan-09       Oct-09     Jul-10        Apr-11     Jan-12    Oct-12



                                                    Source: ECB.                                                                                                 Source: ECB.




                                         majority of the credit institutions surveyed consider that this market is not efficient or is only limitedly
                                         efficient. In relation to the secured market, those taking part in the ECB survey consider that the level of
                                         efficiency deteriorated, though most believe that this market is at least sufficiently efficient.




                                                    Chart 2.1.3                                                                                                  Chart 2.1.4
                                                    RECOURSE TO REGULAR EUROSYSTEM                                                                               3-MONTH MONEY MARKET INTEREST RATES |
                                                    OPERATIONS | AS A PERCENTAGE OF BANKING SYSTEM                                                               SPREAD BETWEEN UNCOLLATERALISED AND COLLATERALISED
                                                    ASSETS                                                                                                       OPERATIONS


                                                          10.0    Countries under stress                                                                                6                                         EURIBOR-EUREPO (rhs)          240
                                                                  High-rated countries                                                                                                                            EURIBOR
                                                           9.0    Euro area                                                                                                                                       EUREPO
                                                                                                                                                                        5                                                                       200
                                                           8.0

                                                           7.0                                                                                                          4                                                                       160
                                         Per cent




                                                           6.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Basis points
                                                                                                                                                      Per cent




                                                                                                                                                                        3                                                                       120
                                                           5.0
                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                       80
                                                           4.0

                                                           3.0                                                                                                          1                                                                       40
                                                           2.0
                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                       0
                                                           1.0

                                                           0.0                                                                                                         -1                                                                       -40
                                                             Jan-08     Jan-09         Jan-10         Jan-11         Jan-12       Jan-13                                Jan-07       Jan-08     Jan-09   Jan-10     Jan-11    Jan-12   Jan-13



                                                    Sources: ECB, Euro Crisis Monitor – Osnabrück University and                                                 Source: ECB.
                                                    Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                                    Notes: High-rated countries: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Fran-
                                                    ce, Finland, the Netherlands. Countries under pressure: Spain,
                                                    Portugal, Italy, Greece, Ireland.
The ECB adopted additional non-conventional measures, salient among them being the
Outright Monetary Transactions, with a view to improving financing conditions in the
interbank market and in the real economy
                                                                                                                    2
To ensure an adequate transmission of monetary policy and its uniformity across the euro area, the ECB
approved new non-conventional measures in 2012, in particular a programme of outright monetary                      47
transactions in the secondary market for public debt (Outright Monetary Transactions). It is condition for




                                                                                                                    ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
accessing OMT that governments fulfil their macro-economic commitments as part of an economic and
financial assistance programme, within the scope of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) or of
the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). No limits were fixed for the amounts in the transactions, though
these should focus primarily on sovereign debt with residual maturity of between 1 and 3 years. In addi-
tion, in the context of these transactions, the Eurosystem agreed to receive the same treatment as other
creditors in the case of a credit event. As a final point, the liquidity generated by these operations would
be totally sterilised, in line with the earlier debt purchase programme, the Securities Market Programme.
The Outright Monetary Transaction’s programme was not activated in 2012, but its announcement had
a strong stabilizing effect in the financial markets, contributing essentially for the narrowing of yield
spreads of sovereign debt of the countries under pressure against countries with high credit rating.

The Governing Council of the ECB took a number of actions during 2012 (in February, July and September)
relating to the increase of the availability of assets as guarantee for refinancing operations, in line with
decisions adopted in the previous year. In particular, it decided: (i) to accept a wider scope of banking
loans with eligible criteria defined by National Central Banks; ii) to reduce the downward limit of credit
rating acceptable for certain asset backed securities (ABS); iii) to suspend the downward limit of the credit
rating for marketable debt instruments, eligible or guaranteed by governments of eligible countries to
the OMT or that are under an assistance programme of the European Union (EU) and the IMF and that
fulfil the associated conditionality, under the approvement of the ECB Governing Council;1 iv) to accept
as eligible assets marketable debt instruments denominated in foreign currency (USD, GBP and JPY), as
long as issued and held in the euro area and that fulfil additional eligible criteria, in line with the decisions
of October 2008 and December 2010.


In spite of the new measures announced, loans to the non-monetary private sector fell
substantially in 2012

Loans to the non-monetary private sector in the euro area slowed in 2012, reflecting a fall in loans to
non-financial corporations and an easing of loans to households. This pattern was common to most
euro area countries, though there was heterogeneity regarding access to financing, resulting of different
conditions in both the supply and the demand for credit. In fact, while in those countries with high credit
rating there was an easing of the annual rate of growth of loans, in those countries under pressure there
was a major contraction in loans, both to non-financial enterprises and to households (Chart 2.1.5 and
Chart 2.1.6).

This heterogeneity is also visible in bank loans’ interest rates. While interest rates for bank loans from
banks were lower across the euro area in general terms, the fall was much steeper in countries with high
credit rating. As a result, there was a rise during the year in the differential between the interest rates
in countries under pressure and those with high credit rating. An analysis of this differential suggests
that there are highly specific conditions in the countries under pressure, but also disturbances in the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy (see “Box 2.1 Differences in monetary policy transmission
between euro area countries”, of this Report).



1 To be noted that debt instruments issued or guaranteed by the Portuguese government are already excused of
  the credit rating limit, by a specific decision of the ECB Council on July 2011.
                                              Chart 2.1.5                                                                          Chart 2.1.6
                                              ANNUAL GROWTH OF LOANS TO NON-                                                       ANNUAL GROWTH OF LOANS TO HOUSEHOLDS
                                              FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS
      I
                                                    6                                                                                   5
48
                                                                                                                                        4
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                    4
                                                                                                                                        3

                                                    2                                                                                   2
                                         Per cent




                                                                                                                             Per cent
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                    0
                                                                                                                                        0

                                                    -2                                                                                  -1

                                                                                                                                        -2
                                                    -4                                                                                             High-rated countries
                                                           High-rated countries                                                                    Countries under pressure
                                                           Countries under pressure                                                     -3
                                                                                                                                                   Euro area
                                                           Euro area
                                                    -6                                                                                  -4
                                                      Jan-10   Jun-10 Nov-10    Abr-11   Set-11   Fev-12   Jul-12   Dez-12                Jan-10    Jun-10 Nov-10     Abr-11   Set-11   Fev-12   Jul-12   Dez-12



                                              Sources: ECB and Banco de Portugal calculations.                                     Sources: ECB and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                              Notes: High-rated countries: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Fran-                        Notes: High-rated countries: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Fran-
                                              ce, Finland, the Netherlands. Countries under pressure: Spain,                       ce, Finland, the Netherlands. Countries under pressure: Spain,
                                              Portugal, Italy, Greece, Ireland.                                                    Portugal, Italy, Greece, Ireland.


                                                     2.2 Monetary and financial conditions of the Portuguese economy


                                         Significant fall in country risk premium throughout 2012

                                         Risk premiums regarding Portuguese debt issuers dropped significantly in 2012 (Chart 2.2.1). A number
                                         of interrelated factors played a part in this improvement.

                                         The ECB implementation of a set of non-conventional monetary policy measures translated into an
                                         improvement in Portuguese banks access to liquidity and a decrease in redenomination risk in the euro
                                         area. In particular, the announcement of an Outright Monetary Transaction programme had the imme-
                                         diate effect of easing conditions in the sovereign debt markets of the euro area (see “Section 2.1 ECB
                                         monetary policy”, of this report).

                                         The capitalization of the banking system carried out in 2012 made it possible to improve banks’ liquidity
                                         and, mostly, to strengthen the solvency of the sector (Charts 2.2.2 and 2.2.3). The capital increases that
                                         took place in the banking sector were very important to increase banks’ resilience to negative shocks,
                                         especially in the current context of structural adjustments to the economy.

                                         Additionally, the fiscal consolidation process in Portugal seems likely to be contributing to improve
                                         investors’ risk perception over Portuguese issuers.

                                         The combined effect of these factors enabled some banks to return to medium and long-term debt
                                         markets in the last quarter of 2012 and in the first quarter of 2013, a point that is particularly relevant
                                         given the current context of segmentation in euro area financial markets and the need to reduce potential
                                         restrictions on the supply of credit resulting from liquidity constraints. Simultaneously, the State has been
                                         also able to issue medium-long term debt for the first time since the beginning of the Economic and
                                         Financial Assistance Programme. In October 2012, the State carried out a swap operation to exchange
                                         public debt payable in 2013 for debt due in 2015 and, in January 2013, the State was able to issue
                                         five year bonds. Recently, the State was able to issue ten year bonds. The latter two operations were
                                         especially important given the high demand from international investors.
                                   Chart 2.2.1
                                   CREDIT DEFAULT SWAP SPREADS OF PORTUGUESE ISSUERS (5 YEARS SENIOR)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                     1800                                                                                                            49
                                                                                                     1600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
                                                                                                     1400

                                                                                      Basis points   1200

                                                                                                     1000

                                                                                                      800

                                                                                                      600

                                                                                                      400

                                                                                                      200

                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        Jun-08 Dec-08 Jun-09 Dec-09 Jun-10 Dec-10 Jun-11 Dec-11 Jun-12 Dec-12

                                                                                                            CGD     BCP      BES      Portuguese Republic             EDP       PT



                                   Source: Thomson Reuters.
                                   Note: Last observation: 9 may 2013.


The banks continued to adjust their balance sheets through large capital increases and a cut
in customer credit

Portuguese banks pursued in 2012 their balance sheets adjustment process, in order to reach a funding
structure more resilient to adverse shocks and less sensitive to changes in international investors’ risk
perception. The year therefore saw a number of capital increase operations, which together with the
underwriting of contingent capital by the State in a number of banks, enabled the banking system to
increase its Core Tier 1 ratio from 9.6 per cent in December 2011 to 11.5 per cent at the end of 2012.


                                   Chart 2.2.2                                                                                                    Chart 2.2.3
                                   LIQUIDITY GAPS OF THE BANKING SYSTEM IN                                                                        OWN FUNDS ADEQUACY OF THE PORTUGUESE
                                   CUMULATIVE MATURITY LADDERS                                                                                    BANKING SYSTEM

                                                 12             Up to 1 month   Up to 3 months                Up to 1 year                                      Core Tier 1 ratio
                                                                                                                                                       13.0     Original own funds adequacy ratio, Tier 1
                                                                                                                                                                Overall own funds adequacy ratio
Percentage of total assets minus liquid assets




                                                  9
                                                                                                                                                       12.0
                                                  6

                                                  3                                                                                                    11.0
                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                       10.0
                                                                                                                                            Per cent




                                                  -3

                                                  -6                                                                                                    9.0

                                                  -9
                                                                                                                                                        8.0
                                                 -12

                                                 -15                                                                                                    7.0

                                                 -18
                                                                                                                                                        6.0
                                                 -21                                                                                                           Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec Jun Dec
                                                       Dec-08 Jun-09 Dec-09 Jun-10 Dec-10 Jun-11 Dec-11 Jun-12 Dec-12                                         2008 2008 2009 2009 2010 2010 2011 2011 2012 2012




                                   Source: Banco de Portugal.                                                                                     Source: Banco de Portugal.
                                   Notes: The liquidity gap is defined as (Liquid Assets – Volatile                                               Notes: The series presented exclude BPN and BPP. It should be
                                   Liabilities)/(Assets – Liquid Assets) x 100 for each cumulative                                                noted that BPP was liquidated in April 2010, after which it cea-
                                   ladder of residual maturity. Information obtained under the re-                                                sed to be included in the universe of banking institutions.
                                   port set by Instruction no. 13/2009 of Banco de Portugal, on
                                   a consolidated basis. The dashed lines show domestic institu-
                                   tions. Last observation: December 2012.
                                         Given the amounts involved, these operations had a considerable impact, both in terms of solvency and
                                         liquidity.

                                         The average credit-to-deposits ratio in the eight main banking groups stood at around 120 per cent at
      I
                                         the end of 2012, representing a fall of nearly 40 percentage points (p.p.) compared with the peak in
50                                       June 2010, and approximately 10 p.p. compared with December 2011. The decrease in this ratio was
                                         accomplished, however, in a different manner than the one occurred in 2011. While in 2011, there was
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         a major contribution from customer deposits, in 2012 the fall in the credit-to-deposits ratio occurred
                                         mostly through a significant cut in credit to customers, since households’ deposits tended to stabilize
                                         over the year (Chart 2.2.4).2 It is worth noting that in 2011, the big increase in households’ deposits was
                                         associated with portfolio rebalancing, by which bank deposits replaced units held in investment funds,
                                         instruments issued by insurers and public debt. As expected, the effect of this move on the deposits
                                         growth rate tended to ebb as the year progressed. In addition, in 2012, some banks restarted bond issues
                                         for placement with customers, and a number of non-financial corporations issued considerable volumes
                                         of bonds for banks to place with their retail customers. Both these factors played a part in slowing the
                                         growth of households’ deposits.

                                         The reduction in bank credit, along with the relative resilience of customer funds, made it possible
                                         to offset the drop in financing from other credit institutions, either in the form of loans or securities,
                                         helping in this way to bring about a situation where there was no increase, taking the year as a whole,
                                         in domestic banks recourse to funding through central banks.


                                         Financing conditions for the non-financial private sector improved slightly but steadily, with
                                         interest rates decreasing and credit standards becoming slightly less restrictive

                                         Over the year, there was a downward move in loans interest rates on new operations and outstanding
                                         amounts, both for non-financial corporations (Chart 2.2.5) and households’ mortgages, in line with
                                         euro area average. This decrease was particularly steep in the case of non-financial corporations (new
                                         loans) and households (new loans and outstanding amounts). Interest rates in these cases decreased
                                         approximately 1 p.p.. The biggest decline in mortgage rates (outstanding amounts), typically with longer
                                         maturities, as compared with the interest rates on loans to non-financial corporations (outstanding
                                         amounts), is mainly justified by the greater weight that loans granted before the current financial crisis,
                                         usually with lower spreads, have in this type of loans. This situation has been very important in monetary
                                         policy transmission by reducing households’ mortgage payments.3

                                         The downward trend for interest rates on loans over the year was due to two factors. On the one hand,
                                         there was a big fall in Euribor rates, which reached all-time lows, very close to zero. On the other hand,
                                         there was a stabilization of spreads for new loans, following three years of widening rates. This fact is
                                         particularly relevant given that the increase in spreads over the last years can be justified in part by changes
                                         in financial markets’ risk perception, which contributed to a non-uniform transmission of monetary
                                         policy (see “Box 2.1 Differences in monetary policy transmission between euro area countries”, of this
                                         Report). Improvements in markets risk perception regarding the State and the banks are thus starting


                                         2 In contrast to households’ deposits, deposits by non-financial corporations fell considerably in 2012. This decre-
                                           ase is however, in part, justified by the relocation of deposits from corporations previously located in Madeira
                                           offshore. Disregarding this effect, and after a decrease in the first semester, there was a stabilization of non-
                                           -financial corporations deposits in the second half of the year. Moreover, there was a fall throughout the year in
                                           deposits at more than 2 years made by non-monetary financial institutions. This move was not, however, a sign
                                           that there had been an effective fall in deposits, since the item merely corresponds to the offsetting of credit
                                           securitization in accounting terms. With the change in the regime governing eligible assets for guarantee in Eu-
                                           rosystem monetary policy operations, the banks to a large extent unwound their credit securitization operations,
                                           leading to a reduction in the associated accounting offset figure.
                                         3 See “Box 4.1 The impact of money market interest rates on Portuguese households’ disposable income”, Banco
                                           de Portugal, Economic Bulletin – Autumn 2012.
               Chart 2.2.4                                                                                                               Chart 2.2.5
                                                                                                                                         INTEREST RATE ON BANK LOANS TO NON-
               HOUSEHOLDS’ DEPOSITS IN THE EURO AREA
                                                                                                                                         FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                               Germany   Italy   Spain                Greece            Ireland       Portugal                                        8.0          Spread (new loans)
                       120.0
                                                                                                                                                                   Interest rate (outstanding amounts)                                      51
                                                                                                                                                                   Interest rate (new loans)
                                                                                                                                                      7.0          Euribor (3 month)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
                       110.0




                                                                                                                        Per cent/ Percentage points
                                                                                                                                                      6.0
Index (Jan 2009=100)




                       100.0                                                                                                                          5.0


                                                                                                                                                      4.0
                        90.0

                                                                                                                                                      3.0
                        80.0
                                                                                                                                                      2.0

                        70.0
                                                                                                                                                      1.0


                        60.0                                                                                                                          0.0
                           Jan-09 Aug-09 Mar-10 Oct-10 May-11 Dec-11                         Jul-12     Feb-13                                          Jan-05      Jan-06   Jan-07   Jan-08   Jan-09   Jan-10   Jan-11   Jan-12   Jan-13




               Source: ECB.                                                                                                              Source: Banco de Portugal.
               Note: Last observation: February 2013.                                                                                    Notes: The spread is calculated as the difference between the
                                                                                                                                         observed interest rate and the 3-month moving average of the
                                                                                                                                         3-month Euribor. Last observation: February 2013.


to have impact on credit supply conditions relatively to the non-financial private sector, though this are
still small. This conclusion is also supported by the most recent bank lending surveys, which pointed to
a progressive stabilization in credit standards over the year. In this regard, it is worth noting that in the
last quarter of 2012 (in the case of consumer loans) and in the first quarter of 2013 (in the case of loans
to non-financial corporations) there was for the first time since 2007 a softening, albeit slight, of credit
standards (Chart 2.2.6).

Banks continued to distinguish non-financial corporations through the price of credit according to


               Chart 2.2.6
               BANK LENDING SURVEY | CREDIT SUPPLY

                                                                     100           Housing
                                                                                   Consumption and other purposes
                                                                                   Non-financial corporations
                                                                           80


                                                                           60


                                                                           40
                                                         Diffusion index




                                                                           20


                                                                            0


                                                                           -20


                                                                           -40
                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan



                                                                                 Jan
                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr



                                                                                 Apr
                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct



                                                                                 Oct
                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul



                                                                                  Jul




                                                                                 2005       2006       2007      2008   2009                                2010      2011     2012   2013




               Source: Banco de Portugal.
               Notes: The diffusion index aggregates all answers from the banks inquired on the bank lending survey according with their intensity
               and direction. The diffusion index takes values between -100 and 100. As regards questions on credit supply, index values below 0
               indicate less demanding credit standards, while values above 0 indicate tighter credit standards.
                                         their level of risk. An analysis of the distribution of interest rates for new loans to private non-financial
                                         corporations shows that though the mode has not changed, the portion of credit granted with lower
                                         (higher) rates was up (down) in December 2012 when compared with December 2011 (Chart 2.2.7). In
      I                                  addition, and in contrast to what can be seen in other countries going through an adjustment process,
                                         there were no significant changes over the year in the interest rate differential between small and large
52
                                         loans to non-financial corporations (Chart 2.2.8). This evidence, together with the available information
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         on moves in bank loans for non-financial corporations, points to the conclusion that any additional diffe-
                                         rentiation regarding firms with higher credit risk has been made through the amount of credit on offer.


                                         Interest rates on loans to non-financial corporations remained, however, clearly above the
                                         euro area average

                                         In spite of the downwards trend observed, interest rates on loans to non-financial corporations remained
                                         significantly above euro area average throughout 2012. This divergence is observed both on outstanding
                                         amounts (the interest rate differential against the euro area average is 1.4 p.p. above the value observed
                                         in year-end 2009 – a point when the effects of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area were not in the
                                         spotlight) and on new loans (the interest rate differential against the euro area average increased 1.7
                                         p.p. in the same period).

                                         There appear to be three factors explaining the high level of interest rates on loans to non-financial
                                         corporations, as compared to the euro area average. These factors have been combined with distortions
                                         in the transmission of monetary policy in the euro area (see “Box 2.1 Differences in monetary policy
                                         transmission between euro area countries”, of this Report).

                                         In the first place, the adjustment under way in the Portuguese economy, with considerable consequences
                                         for economic activity and firms’ financial position, is leading to a fall in credit quality and to a substantial
                                         increase in banks’ risk perception, against the backdrop of persisting sovereign debt crises in the euro
                                         area (Chart 2.2.9).




                                          Chart 2.2.7                                                                               Chart 2.2.8
                                          INTEREST RATE DISTRIBUTION ON NEW LOANS                                                   INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN SMALL
                                          TO PRIVATE NON-FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS                                                     AND LARGE EXPOSURES (NEW LOANS)

                                          0.3                                                               Jun-10                         3.0               Italy   Spain    Ireland    Portugal
                                                                                                            Dec-11
                                                                                                            Dec-12
                                         0.25                                                                                              2.5


                                          0.2                                                                                              2.0
                                                                                                                       Percentage points




                                         0.15                                                                                              1.5


                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                           1.0


                                         0.05
                                                                                                                                           0.5


                                           0
                                                0   1   2   3   4   5     6    7     8   9   10   11   12    13   14                       0.0
                                                                        Interest rate                                                        Jan08 Jul08 Jan09 Jul09 Jan10 Jul10 Jan11 Jul11 Jan12 Jul12 Jan13




                                          Source: Banco de Portugal.                                                                Source: ECB.
                                          Note: Histogram of interest rates on new loans to private non-                            Notes: Small exposures correspond to loans with less than 1
                                          -financial corporations using the amount of loans granted as                              million euros and large exposures correspond to loans with
                                          weight.                                                                                   more than 1 million euros. Note that the interest rate level is
                                                                                                                                    strongly affected by several factors, notably, loans maturity.
In the second place, the balance sheet of Portuguese banks continued to be impacted by the effects
of past operations, both on the asset and liability side of the balance sheet, which contributed to high
funding costs as compared to the return on interest generating assets (see “Box 2.2 Margins in bank
interest rates: Portugal within the euro area”, of this Report). On the liability side, interest paid by banks                                                               2
on deposits remained high as result of the fierce competition for deposits that took place in 2011 and
                                                                                                                                                                             53
the greater weight of long term deposits. Interest rates for new deposits have, however, been converging




                                                                                                                                                                             ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
to the euro area average, which should be due to ECB measures and Banco de Portugal imposition of a
penalty, in terms of capital ratio, on deposits with excessive interest rates.4 For some banks, the high cost
of capitalization through the use of public funds is also weighing on their funding costs. Simultaneously,
on the asset side, banks have had difficulties repricing their credit portfolios given the large weight of
households’ mortgages granted before the current financial crisis, whose interest rates are below current
funding cost, and thus contribute negatively to banks’ net interest margin. The high spread on new loans
to non-financial corporations, typically with shorter maturities, should be thus contributing to mitigate
the low return on other bank assets, in particular, mortgage loans.

Lastly, there are signs of changes in the way that the credit market for non-financial corporations works.
In this regard, non-domestic banks have been cutting loans to non-financial corporations since the third
quarter of 2011 at a significantly higher pace than domestic banks (Chart 2.2.10). In addition, and


      Chart 2.2.9                                                                                      Chart 2.2.10
      NON-PERFORMING LOANS RATIO                                                                       LOANS TO NON-FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS
                                                                                                       GRANTED BY RESIDENT DOMESTIC AND NON-
                                                                                                       DOMESTIC BANKS | ANNUAL RATE OF CHANGE

           18.0        Private resident sector                                                          20                    Domestic     Non-domestic
                       Non-financial corporations (resident)
                       Households - housing
           16.0        Households - consumption and other purposes                                      15

           14.0
                                                                                                        10
           12.0

                                                                                                            5
           10.0
Per cent




                                                                                                 Per cent




            8.0                                                                                             0

            6.0
                                                                                                            -5
            4.0

                                                                                                      -10
            2.0

            0.0                                                                                       -15
              Dec-08     Jun-09   Dec-09   Jun-10   Dec-10   Jun-11   Dec-11   Jun-12   Dec-12           Jan08      Jan09       Jan10       Jan11         Jan12    Jan13



      Source: Banco de Portugal.                                                                       Source: Banco de Portugal.
      Notes: The non-performing loans ratio encloses there ele-                                        Notes: Annual growth rates are obtained from the relation
      ments, the amount owed on credit with instalments of capital                                     between outstanding amounts of loans granted, adjusted
      or interest overdue for a period of 90 days or more, the overdue                                 for securitization operations and monthly transactions, which
      amount of restructured credit with certain characteristics not                                   are calculated using the outstanding amounts corrected of
      included in the preceding item and, lastly, the amount of credit                                 reclassifications, write-offs/write-downs, exchange rate chan-
      with instalments of capital or interest overdue for a period of                                  ges and price revaluations. Whenever relevant, the figures are
      90 days or more, but in relation to which there is evidence whi-                                 additionally adjusted for credit portfolio sales. Last observation:
      ch justifies its classification as non-performing credit, namely a                               February 2013.
      debtor’s bankruptcy or liquidation.



4 In order to ensure stability in the Portuguese financial system, Banco de Portugal imposed a deduction on the
  Core Tier 1 ratio at the end of 2011, using as a base the amount of deposits contracted at interest rates of
  more than 300 base points above the Euribor rate relevant for the period of the operation (Banco de Portugal
  Instruction no 28/2011). This prudential measure had a considerable impact on the highest deposit rates on
  offer by banks and on the overall volume of deposits with rates above the thresholds set out. This regime was
  buttressed in the second quarter of 2012, including, among other things, the doubling of previous regulatory
  capital requirements and a bigger penalty on short-term and less stable deposits (Banco de Portugal Instruction
  no 15/2012).
                                         following a substantial rise between 2009 and 2011, the average number of banking relations has been
                                         falling since the first quarter of 2011, but even so it is above the figure recorded in 2009. These changes
                                         could well have an impact on the cost of financing of a number of firms through a potential reduction
      I                                  in their bargaining power with banks.

54
                                         In a context of a major contraction in economic activity, total credit to non-financial
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         corporations was only slightly down, though showing a high level of heterogeneity
                                         depending on firm size and sector of activity

                                         A thorough analysis of credit granted to the non-financial private sector requires a study of all sources
                                         of debt. This includes not only loans granted by resident financial institutions, but also loans from non-
                                         -residents, debt issues (held by residents and non-residents), trade credit (from residents and non-residents),
                                         loans from households and, in the case of state owned corporations (not consolidating in the general
                                         government), loans from the State. By grouping all these sources, total credit becomes equivalent to
                                         total debt, with the advantage of allowing one to analyse changes in funding sources.

                                         Total credit to the non-financial private sector (Chart 2.2.11) slid gradually down over 2012 (the annual
                                         variation being -2.0 per cent in December 2012). This slide was mainly due to a considerable drop in
                                         total credit to households (-4.0 per cent), with total credit to non-financial corporations down by a far
                                         smaller extent (-0.6 per cent). The fall in credit to non-financial corporations was seen as much in private
                                         corporations as in state owned corporations (not consolidating in the general government) (Chart 2.2.12),
                                         although the composition differed. In the case of private corporations there was a fall in bank financing,
                                         which was replaced to a certain degree by credit from non-residents, while the opposite was true in state
                                         owned corporations. In early 2013, it was observed a strong acceleration in total credit to state owned
                                         corporations, which was not observed in the case of private corporations.

                                         Although total credit to non-financial corporations was only slightly down in 2012, there is a diversity of
                                         situations, depending on firm size and sector of activity (Table 2.2.1). Large private corporations opera-
                                         ting internationally or making part of an international group were likely to find alternatives to domestic
                                         banking credit, such as credit from non-residents and the issue of securities to be placed by banks with
                                         their retail customers. Access to these sources meant that the adverse economic circumstances did not
                                         prevent total credit from posting a substantial rise during the year. On the other hand, micro and small


                                          Chart 2.2.11
                                          CREDIT TO THE NON-FINANCIAL PRIVATE SECTOR AND NOMINAL GDP | YEAR-ON-YEAR RATE OF CHANGE

                                                                                                 Nominal GDP
                                                                                                 Total credit to the private non-financial sector
                                                                                                 Bank loans to the private non-financial sector
                                                                                                 Total credit to private non-financial corporations
                                                                                                 Bank loans to private non-financial corporations
                                                                                     12          Total credit to households

                                                                                     10
                                                                                     8
                                                                                     6
                                                                          Per cent




                                                                                     4
                                                                                     2
                                                                                     0
                                                                                     -2
                                                                                     -4
                                                                                     -6
                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                 2009
                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                                                       2011
                                                                                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                                                                                     2012
                                                                                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013




                                                                                          Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Feb



                                          Source: Banco de Portugal.
                                          Note: See credit aggregates definitions in Monthly Economic Indicators.
             Chart 2.2.12
             TOTAL CREDIT TO NON-FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS | CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ANNUAL RATE OF CHANGE
                                            Private corporations                                                                                        State owned corporations                                                2
                    6.0                                                                       6.0                                   12.0                                                                      24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                55
                                                                                                                                    10.0                                                                      20.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
                    4.0                                                                       4.0
                                                                                                                                     8.0                                                                      16.0

                                                                                                                                     6.0                                                                      12.0
                    2.0                                                                       2.0
                                                                                                                                     4.0                                                                      8.0
Percentage points




                                                                                                                Percentage points




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Per cent
                                                                                                     Per cent
                    0.0                                                                       0.0                                    2.0                                                                      4.0

                                                                                                                                     0.0                                                                      0.0
                    -2.0                                                                      -2.0                                  -2.0                                                                      -4.0

                                                                                                                                    -4.0                                                                      -8.0
                    -4.0                                                                      -4.0
                                                                                                                                    -6.0                                                                      -12.0

                                                                                                                                    -8.0                                                                      -16.0
                    -6.0                                                                      -6.0
                                                                                                                              -10.0                                                                           -20.0

                    -8.0                                                                      -8.0                            -12.0                                                                           -24.0
                           2010 2010 2010 2010 2011 2011 2011 2011 2012 2012 2012 2012 2013                                                2010 2010 2010 2010 2011 2011 2011 2011 2012 2012 2012 2012 2013
                            T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 Feb                                                                         Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Feb



                                                                                      Loans (resident banks)
                                                                                      Loans (other resident financial institutions)
                                                                                      Debt securities (resident)
                                                                                      Loans (other residents) and trade credit (resident)
                                                                                      Non-residents (loans, debt securities, trade credit)
                                                                                      Total credit (rhs)
                                                                                      Loans granted and debt securities held by resident banks (rhs)

             Source: Banco de Portugal.
             Notes: Contributions to the annual rate of change of total credit to private and state owned (non-consolidating in the general gover-
             nment) corporations. See credit aggregates definitions in Monthly Economic Indicators. Last observation: February 2013.




firms, and to a lesser extent, medium-sized firms, typically more dependent on bank credit, saw a consi-
derable cut back in total credit granted. As compared with other countries in the euro area, Portuguese
small and medium-sized firms found a higher than average difficulty to access credit (Chart 2.2.13). Even
so, they registered a lower level of difficulty in accessing credit than the one observed in other countries
under market pressure, such as Greece, Spain and Italy.

An analysis of the evolution of total credit to non-financial corporations per firm size should not be
dissociated from its composition in terms of sector of activity. Thus, the substantial fall in total credit
for micro, small and medium-sized corporations is likely to be related to the high proportion of credit
to sectors such as construction, real estate and trade. It is worth noting that these sectors saw the most
negative annual variation in total credit. Excluding these sectors, the annual rate of change in total credit
to micro, small and medium-sized corporations would be considerably less negative. In fact, in the light
of the moves in quarterly flows, there would be an inversion in the downwards trend in the beginning of
2013 (see “Box 2.3 Differentiation in credit to non-financial corporations with cross-referencing of size
and sector of activity”, on this Report). In the same way, the bigger firm size and the lower proportion
of bank credit in sectors such as electricity, gas and water, transport and warehousing and non-financial
holdings look to have played a part in making the annual rate of change in total credit for these sectors
bigger than for the remaining sectors.
                                         Table 2.2.1
                                         CREDIT TO NON-FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS BY SECTOR OF ACTIVITY AND FIRM SIZE | ANNUAL RATE OF
      I                                  CHANGE

                                                                                                     Bank credit                     Total Credit             Sector/  Bank
                                                                                                                                                                size   credit
56                                                                                                                                                             share   share
                                                                                                                                                             (% total (% total
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                                                                              credit) credit)

                                                                                              2011       2012       2013      2011       2012       2013       2012      2012
                                                                                              Dec.       Dec.       Feb.      Dec.       Dec.       Feb.       Dec.      Dec.


                                         Total                                                -2.4       -5.8       -5.8       0.3       -0.6       -0.2     100.0       50.5


                                         Sectors


                                          Manufacturing (incl. mining and quarrying)          -3.0       -7.8       -5.6      -2.2       -0.8        0.3      11.0       66.1


                                          Electricity, gas and water                           5.4       -4.5      -10.4       5.7        6.6        1.4       9.1       32.7


                                          Construction                                        -3.1       -8.7       -8.9      -2.7       -7.1       -7.5      13.6       69.6
                                          Wholesale and retail trade (incl. repair of
                                          motor vehicles and motorcycles)                     -5.9     -10.6       -10.1      -1.1       -4.7       -4.1      11.0       56.9


                                          Transportation and storage                           4.4       7.6       15.5        8.7        3.2       10.9       9.0       47.6


                                          Accommodation and food service activities            9.5       -4.0       -3.4       5.4       -4.1       -4.1       3.5       69.7


                                          Information and communication                     -23.5        -8.3       -9.8     -25.6      24.9        21.0       2.8       24.3


                                          Non-financial holdings                              -6.3       -6.6      -11.3       5.9        5.3        2.2      17.9       43.3


                                          Real estate activities                              -5.4       -3.9       -3.7      -2.4       -6.9       -6.6      10.8       61.2
                                          Professional, scientific, technical and
                                          administrative activities                            4.6     -15.1       -14.3       7.6       -4.8       -3.7       6.4       50.2
                                          Education, human health, social work and
                                          other personal activities                           -4.2       -4.7       -4.1      -6.6       -2.0       -1.8       3.0       65.4


                                          Other activities                                     4.1       4.0        2.4      -27.2        0.4       -0.3       1.8       55.3


                                         Size


                                          Micro                                               -3.3       -9.9       -9.2      -3.7       -4.5       -3.8      25.9       56.5


                                          Small                                               -4.3       -9.8       -8.2      -1.0       -6.7       -5.2      14.8       71.6


                                          Medium                                              -2.3       -5.1       -4.7      -5.2       -2.8       -2.3      17.1       66.9


                                          Large                                                2.9       0.8        0.6        4.1        3.4        2.9      24.2       39.0


                                          Non-financial holdings                              -5.2       -6.6      -11.3       5.4        5.0        1.9      18.1       42.8
                                         Source: Banco de Portugal.
                                         Notes: See credit aggregates definitions in Monthly Economic Indicators. Bank credit includes all credit granted by resident banks,
                                         which includes not only loans (adjusted for securitizations) but also debt securities held by banks. There is no data available regarding
                                         trade credit by sector of activity and firm dimension. Last observation: February 2013.
Decrease in bank loans throughout 2012, albeit less pronounced in the more recent period

Analysing only bank loans, there was a considerable fall in loans both to non-financial corporations (Chart
2.2.14) and to households, in line with what can be seen in other countries undergoing adjustment. In                                                                                                                           2
the case of non-financial corporations, though bank loans continue to fall, the fact that the annualized
quarterly rate of variation, corrected for seasonality, being above the annual rate of change since the                                                                                                                         57
end of 2012 is an indication that the downward trend is slowing. According to the bank lending survey,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
the fall in bank loans should be related as much to factors on the supply side, such as a high level of risk
perception and high cost of capital, as to factors on the demand side. In this regard, the banks surveyed
indicated that firms are still showing little demand for credit for new investments. In fact, firms have looked
above all for credit to provide working capital or restructuring of debt. As for households, demand has
been hindered above all by lack of consumer confidence, in particular in terms of the housing market.




      Chart 2.2.13                                                                                                                              Chart 2.2.14
      ACCESS TO FINANCE FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM                                                                                                    BANK LOANS TO NON-FINANCIAL
      ENTERPRISES | PERCENTAGE OF FIRMS INDICATING ACCESS                                                                                       CORPORATIONS IN THE EURO AREA | ANNUAL RATE
      TO FINANCE AS THEIR MAIN PROBLEM                                                                                                          OF CHANGE


           35.0                                                                                                                                       8.00     Germany   Italy    Spain      Greece      Portugal    Ireland

           30.0                                                                                                                                       6.00

                                                                                                                                                      4.00
           25.0

                                                                                                                                                      2.00
           20.0
Per cent




                                                                                                                                           Per cent




                                                                                                                                                      0.00
           15.0
                                                                                                                                                      -2.00
           10.0
                                                                                                                                                      -4.00
            5.0
                                                                                                                                                      -6.00
            0.0
                                                                                                                                                      -8.00
                            Germany




                                                                                  Netherlands
                                                                 France




                                                                                                Austria
                  Belgium




                                                                                                          Portugal
                                                Greece
                                      Ireland




                                                                                                                     Finland
                                                                          Italy
                                                         Spain




                                                                                                                               Euro area




                                                                                                                                                 -10.00
                                                                                                                                                      Jan-10    Jul-10   Jan-11     Jul-11      Jan-12      Jul-12     Jan-13




      Source: ECB.                                                                                                                              Sources: ECB and Banco de Portugal.
      Note: Information relating to the months from April to Sep-                                                                               Notes: The annual rate of change is adjusted for sales of credit
      tember 2012.                                                                                                                              portfolios and securitizations. Counterpart of loans correspon-
                                                                                                                                                ds to the euro area. In the case of Portugal, the data presen-
                                                                                                                                                ted corresponds to the series published in Monthly Economic
                                                                                                                                                Indicators.
BOX 2.1 | DIFFERENCES IN MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION
BETWEEN EURO AREA COUNTRIES

                                                                                                                      2
This box documents the differences between the interest rates on loans to ﬁrms from various countries
of the euro area, and shows that these differences are not fully explained by factors related to the cost             59
of bank funding or the expectations about the level of the countries’ economic activity.




                                                                                                                      ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
Since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, in late 2009, the question has been
raised of whether there is justiﬁcation for the sudden increases in yields on government debt in some
countries. In fact, the increase may be the result of the economic fundamentals of the countries affected,
but it could also be generated by a general panic that needs to be rapidly halted. For example, all things
being equal a country with high debt and low growth prospects has a higher probability of default, and
this is reﬂected in the funding costs of banks and, thereby, the cost of corporate ﬁnancing. The question
that arises is whether the differences in interest rates of loans to ﬁrms observed in the euro area can be
explained by differences in the fundamentals of economies or whether there are other factors affecting
the observed interest rates, such as the volatility of the expectations of economic agents in relation to
the sovereign. The dichotomy between countries where the sovereign debt is under pressure and the
other economies raises problems for the smooth functioning of ﬁnancial markets, and in particular to
the seamless transmission of monetary policy across the euro area. This issue is important because the
funding costs of the productive sector of the economy depend on this transmission.1

Chart 1 illustrates one of the manifestations of this segmentation of sovereign debt markets. It gives the
interest rate for new loans to non-ﬁnancial enterprises for two groups of countries: those under sovereign
debt pressure (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain) and a set of other euro area countries with high
credit rating (Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany and the Netherlands). Two features stand out.
In the ﬁrst place, the interest rates in those countries currently under pressure have been consistently
higher than the remaining countries; for example, during the ﬁrst two years of the sample (until the end
of 2009), the average spread between the two groups of countries was 29 basis points. In the second
place, there was an increase to a very wide spread between the middle of 2010 and the start of 2013.

Can this increase be explained by the worsening of the macroeconomic and ﬁnancial conditions of
these countries, or is there an important component relating to other factors, including the perception
of the risk of those countries under pressure going into default and the problems in transmission of the
monetary policy that derive from this?

It is not easy to identify the factors that determine these differences. One way of approaching the problem
is to break down the interest rate into three factors: one is common to all the countries, but variable
over time; one is a speciﬁc ﬁxed component over time for each country, with the purpose of elimina-
ting from the analysis the secular differences between countries; and a component that is idiosyncratic
for each country, varying in time and with information relevant to the formation of interest rate in the
credit market. In addition to these components, there is also, as usual in empirical models, a random
component independent from country to country and temporally uncorrelated.

The common component captures movements in the interest rates that are common to all the countries.
The component that is ﬁxed per country captures those factors which did not change over the period
of analysis and were speciﬁc to each country. The time-varying idiosyncratic component captures what
is explained by the variables that are relevant for the formation of interest rates and not belonging to
the two previous components. The random component is simply the difference between the interest
rate one wants to explain and the observable components mentioned above; for this reason we will
designate it as the residual.


1   On this issue, see “Special Issues Transmission of monetary policy in the euro area”, Banco de Portugal, Econo-
    mic Bulletin - Autumn 2012.
                                         What idiosyncratic variables are to be included? In the formation of interest rates for loans there are at
                                         least two factors to consider for each country: (i) the cost of ﬁnancing for the ﬁnancial institutions that
                                         will be granting the loans; and (ii) the expectations on the economic activity of the country. For the ﬁrst
I                                        factor, two explanatory variables were included: the average spreads for credit default swaps (CDS) of
                                         the main banks in each country, a gauge frequently used to evaluate the risk associated with each bank
60
                                         (which will of necessity affect its cost of ﬁnancing), and the amount for long-term reﬁnancing operations
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         (LTROs)2 (expressed as a logarithm), which indicates a greater likelihood that the banks using this facility
                                         are ﬁnding difﬁculties in accessing ﬁnance. Note that these variables already incorporate at least some
                                         of the expectations of economic agents regarding the creditworthiness of sovereigns; for example, by
                                         measuring the risk of banks’ insolvency the average CDS spreads also reﬂect sovereign risk to the extent
                                         that banks generally hold sovereign debt. In terms of expectations as to economic activity, the forecasts
                                         used were those relating to the rate of GDP growth for the country in the following year.3 This set of
                                         variables aims at capturing the effect of the economic fundamentals on the formation of the interest
                                         rates in loans to ﬁrms.

                                         The ﬁgures estimated through this model lead to the conclusion that an increase in the spreads of CDS
                                         is associated with an increase in the interest rates of loans. Additionally, less favourable forecasts for
                                         economic activity and higher ORPA amounts for the country’s banks are associated with higher interest
                                         rates.

                                         Chart 2 helps to interpret the ﬁndings obtained with this simple approach. It can be seen that the ﬁxed
                                         temporal effects accompany the moves in the ECB monetary policy reference rates, also shown on the
                                         chart. This effect is as expected and the closeness of the two curves is clearly visible. The chart also illus-
                                         trates the difference between the weighted average of the residuals in the countries under pressure and
                                         the weighted average of the residuals in the other countries. If the variables mentioned above (aiming at
                                         capturing the costs of bank ﬁnancing and the level of economic activity in each country) were sufﬁcient
                                         to explain the evolution of the interest rate of loans to ﬁrms, this difference should be approximately zero
                                         at all times. The fact that this difference progressively increases at the end of the sample means that the
                                         idiosyncratic factors (ﬁxed or time-varying) considered and ﬁxed time effects are not sufﬁcient to explain
                                         the difference in interest rates observed during this period. The difference obtained at the end of the
                                         sample is 74 basis points. This can be a measure, albeit imperfect and bearing in mind the limitations
                                         of the model, of the problems of monetary policy transmission recently observed, and it may be due to
                                         expectations about the creditworthiness of countries under pressure that go beyond the effects already
                                         included in the cost of bank ﬁnancing and the level of economic activity.




                                         2 See the Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin - Autumn 2012; the results presented in this Box differ from those
                                           that will be found in the Bulletin for two reasons: (i) the data now relate to the period up to February 2013; and
                                           (ii) additional data on some countries has been included.
                                         3 The inclusion of variables relating to public debt was also used in alternative formulations of the model, though
                                           they had no signiﬁcant impact on the results. Furthermore, the regressors used have endogeneity problems. This
                                           means that the results must be treated with all due circumspection.
Chart 1                                                                                                                                                                                                       Chart 2
INTEREST RATES IN LOANS TO NON FINANCIAL                                                                                                                                                                      RESULTS OF THE DECOMPOSITION OF THE
FIRMS FOR COUNTRIES UNDER PRESSURE                                                                                                                                                                            INTEREST RATE IN TERMS OF THE DIFFERENT
AND COUNTRIES WITH HIGH CREDIT RATING |                                                                                                                                                                       COMPONENTS. RESIDUALS FOR THE SET OF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
AVERAGES WEIGHTED BY COUNTRY GDP                                                                                                                                                                              COUNTRIES UNDER PRESSURE AND THE SET
                                                                                                                                                                                                              OF COUNTRIES WITH HIGH CREDIT RATING                                                                  61
                                                                                                                                                                                                              WEIGHTED BY COUNTRY GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
7                                                                                                         countries with high credit rating                                                                          Time fixed effects in the euro area
                                                                                                          countries under pressure                                                                                   Difference between residuals of countries under stress and high rated countries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MRO rate (rhs)
6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.00                                                                         5
5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.50                                                                         4.5

4                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.00                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage points
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.50                                                                        3.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Percentage
3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1.00                                                                        3

2                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1.50                                                                        2.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2.00                                                                        2
1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2.50                                                                        1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3.00                                                                        1
0
                                2008m12




                                                                     2009m12




                                                                                                           2010m12




                                                                                                                                                2011m12




                                                                                                                                                                                     2012m12
     2008m3
              2008m6
                       2008m9


                                          2009m3
                                                   2009m6
                                                            2009m9


                                                                               2010m3
                                                                                        2010m6
                                                                                                 2010m9


                                                                                                                     2011m3
                                                                                                                              2011m6
                                                                                                                                       2011m9


                                                                                                                                                          2012m3
                                                                                                                                                                   2012m6
                                                                                                                                                                            2012m9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3.50                                                                        0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -4.00                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan08Jul08Jan09Jul09Jan10Jul10Jan11Jul11Jan12Jul12Jan13


Sources: Consensus Forecasts, ECB, Thomson Reuters and                                                                                                                                                        Sources: Consensus Forecasts, ECB, Thomson Reuters and
Banco de Portugal’s calculations.                                                                                                                                                                             Banco de Portugal’s calculations.
Note: Countries under pressure: Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal                                                                                                                                              Note: Countries under pressure: Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal
and Spain; countries with high credit rating: Germany, Austria,                                                                                                                                               and Spain; countries with high credit rating: Germany, Austria,
Belgium, Finland, France and the Netherlands.                                                                                                                                                                 Belgium, Finland, France and the Netherlands.
BOX 2.2 | MARGINS IN BANK INTEREST RATES: PORTUGAL WITHIN THE
EURO AREA

                                                                                                                                                            2
During 2012, there was a considerable fall in the interest rates paid out by Portuguese banks on new
deposits (Chart 1). In tandem, there was a far less marked fall in the interest rates for new loans, especially                                             63
for non-ﬁnancial corporations. This meant that there was a widening of the margin on new operations




                                                                                                                                                            ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
with customers, measured as the difference between return on loans and the cost of deposits held. This
widening of the margin on new operations contrasts with the move in the margin implicit in stocks, which
continued to narrow and is now at a record low. The aim of this Box is to analyse the factors underlying
this move, while looking at the main differences between the Portuguese situation and that of other
countries in the euro area that have been particularly affected by the sovereign debt crisis.

As can be seen in Chart 2, the total margin on new operations in Portugal has been rising since the second
half of 2011, and at year-end 2012 stood at 4.0 p.p., that is some 2 to 3 p.p. above the ﬁgures for the
euro area countries in the Chart (Table 1). It should also be noted that unlike Portugal and Ireland, the
margin on new operations has remained relatively stable in Spain. In Greece, the margin narrowed as a
consequence of the steep rise in the cost of deposits held, possibly reﬂecting the need by Greek banks
to counter the outﬂow of deposits. In turn, the total margin with customers in Portugal implicit in the
stocks of assets and liabilities has been narrowing since the second half of 2011, standing at a record low
of 1.4 p.p. in December 2012 and between 0.5 and 1.5 p.p. narrower than in the euro area countries
selected for comparison. Breaking down the margin implicit in the stocks per operation, it is possible to
detect the persistence of past operations in the stocks, and this explains the squeeze on banks’ interest
rate margins in Portugal when compared with other countries.

In the ﬁrst place, Portuguese banks have limitations in their ability to manage the average differential
of their mortgage loan portfolios given the current cost of ﬁnancing, because most of such loans are
characterized by long maturities, indexed to Euribor and with ﬁxed low spread. In this context, the diffe-
rential between the return on loans to households in Portugal and the other countries in the sample is
very negative. Moreover, it has been widening since the end of 2011, standing at more than 1 p.p. in
December 2012. On the other hand, however, the interest differential on outstanding amounts of non-
-ﬁnancial corporations is higher than in the other countries in the sample, except for Greece. The ﬁgure
stands at around 1 p.p., attenuating the effect on the banks’ margins deriving from the low return on
mortgage loans. The low level of interest rates on mortgages has a favourable effect on the proﬁtability
of banking via the impact on the level of default on these loans. However, this topic is not here discussed.

      Chart 1
      HOUSEHOLDS’ DEPOSITS WITH AGREED MATURITY
                    Interest rates on households' time deposits                                       Breakdown by maturity of households' time deposits
                                                                                                                       (outstanding)
           5.00                                                                             140 000
                                                                                                       Over 2 years                 Between 1 and 2 years
           4.50                                                                                        Up to 1 year                 Sight deposits
                                                                                            120 000
           4.00

           3.50                                                                             100 000
                                                                             EUR millions




           3.00
Per cent




                                                                                             80 000
           2.50
                                                                                             60 000
           2.00

           1.50                                                                              40 000
           1.00     Up to 1 year
                    Between 1 and 2 years                                                    20 000
           0.50     Over 2 years
                    Implicit in the stock of deposits with agreed maturity
           0.00                                                                                  0
              Jan-09 Jul-09 Jan-10 Jul-10 Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12                            Jan-09 Jul-09 Jan-10 Jul-10 Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12


      Source: Banco de Portugal.
                                          Chart 2
                                          INTEREST RATES SPREADS ON OPERATIONS WITH CUSTOMERS | PER CENT, PERCENTAGE POINTS
I                                                                  New business                                                       Outstanding
                                                                       Portugal                                                         Portugal
                                         6.0                                                          -6.0   6.0                                                          -6.0
64                                                                                                           5.0                                                          -5.0
                                         5.0                                                          -5.0
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                             4.0                                                          -4.0
                                         4.0                                                          -4.0   3.0                                                          -3.0

                                                                                                             2.0                                                          -2.0
                                         3.0                                                          -3.0
                                                                                                             1.0                                                          -1.0
                                         2.0                                                          -2.0
                                                                                                             0.0                                                          0.0

                                         1.0                                                          -1.0   -1.0                                                         1.0

                                                                                                             -2.0                                                         2.0
                                         0.0                                                          0.0
                                                                                                             -3.0                                                         3.0

                                         -1.0                                                         1.0    -4.0                                                         4.0
                                            Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12             Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12


                                                                         Greece                                                           Greece
                                         6.0                                                          -6.0   6.0                                                          -6.0

                                                                                                             5.0                                                          -5.0
                                         5.0                                                          -5.0
                                                                                                             4.0                                                          -4.0

                                         4.0                                                          -4.0   3.0                                                          -3.0

                                                                                                             2.0                                                          -2.0
                                         3.0                                                          -3.0
                                                                                                             1.0                                                          -1.0

                                         2.0                                                          -2.0   0.0                                                          0.0

                                                                                                             -1.0                                                         1.0
                                         1.0                                                          -1.0
                                                                                                             -2.0                                                         2.0
                                         0.0                                                          0.0
                                                                                                             -3.0                                                         3.0

                                                                                                             -4.0                                                         4.0
                                         -1.0                                                         1.0
                                                                                                                Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12
                                            Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12

                                                                        Spain                                                            Spain
                                         6.0                                                          -6.0   6.0                                                          -6.0

                                                                                                             5.0                                                          -5.0
                                         5.0                                                          -5.0
                                                                                                             4.0                                                          -4.0

                                         4.0                                                          -4.0   3.0                                                          -3.0

                                                                                                             2.0                                                          -2.0
                                         3.0                                                          -3.0
                                                                                                             1.0                                                          -1.0
                                         2.0                                                          -2.0
                                                                                                             0.0                                                          0.0

                                         1.0                                                          -1.0   -1.0                                                         1.0

                                                                                                             -2.0                                                         2.0
                                         0.0                                                          0.0
                                                                                                             -3.0                                                         3.0

                                         -1.0                                                         1.0    -4.0                                                         4.0
                                            Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12             Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12

                                                                         Ireland                                                          Ireland
                                         6.0                                                          -6.0    6.0                                                         -6.0
                                                                                                              5.0                                                         -5.0
                                         5.0                                                          -5.0
                                                                                                              4.0                                                         -4.0
                                         4.0                                                          -4.0    3.0                                                         -3.0
                                                                                                              2.0                                                         -2.0
                                         3.0                                                          -3.0
                                                                                                              1.0                                                         -1.0
                                         2.0                                                          -2.0    0.0                                                         0.0
                                                                                                             -1.0                                                         1.0
                                         1.0                                                          -1.0
                                                                                                             -2.0                                                         2.0
                                         0.0                                                          0.0    -3.0                                                         3.0
                                                                                                             -4.0                                                         4.0
                                         -1.0                                                         1.0       Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12
                                            Jan-03 May-04 Sep-05 Jan-07 May-08 Sep-09 Jan-11 May-12                      Spread on loans
                                                     Spread on loans                                                     Spread on time deposits (rhs, reversed)
                                                     Spread on time deposits (rhs, reversed)                             6M Euribor (6M moving average)
                                                     6M Euribor                                                          Total spread
                                                     Total spread                                                        Spread on total deposits (rhs, reversed)


                                          Sources: ECB and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                          Notes: Spread on lending operations calculated as the difference between the interest rates on loans and the 6-month Euribor
                                          (6-month moving average in the case of outstanding amounts). Spread on borrowing operations is the difference between the
                                          6-month Euribor (the 6-month moving average in the case of outstanding amounts) and interest rates on deposits.
 Table 1
 INTEREST RATES SPREADS ON OPERATIONS WITH CUSTOMERS | INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON, PERCENTAGE
 POINTS, PER CENT
                                                                                                                                       2
                                      Portugal                  Greece                    Spain                    Ireland
                              Dec.09 Dec.11 Dec.12 Dec.09 Dec.11 Dec.12 Dec.09 Dec.11 Dec.12 Dec.09 Dec.11 Dec.12
                                                                                                                                       65
 New business




                                                                                                                                       ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
 Total spread (1)+(2)          2.6      3.3      4.0     2.5      2.2     1.3      1.0     1.5      0.9     1.4      1.5     2.3
   (1) Spread on loans         3.1      4.9      5.4     3.2      5.1     5.6      1.9     2.3      3.1     1.8      2.2     3.2
     NFC                       3.1      4.8      5.4     2.7      5.1     5.8      1.7     2.1      3.0     1.7      2.3     2.8
     Households                3.2      5.1      5.8     4.3      5.1     4.7      3.5     3.3      3.8     2.0      2.1     3.5
      House purchase           1.3      2.6      3.1     2.4      2.4     2.7      1.5     1.9      2.5     1.8      1.4     3.3
      Cons. credit & other
                               5.4      6.4      7.1     7.9      7.3     6.8      5.6     5.2      6.3     2.7      4.0     5.6
      purp.
   (2) Spread on time
                               -0.5    -1.5      -1.4   -0.7     -2.9    -4.2     -0.9    -0.8     -2.2     -0.4    -0.7     -0.8
   deposits
     memo: 6M Euribor          1.0      1.7      0.3
 Outstanding
 Total spread (1)+(3)          2.0      1.8      1.4     3.8      3.8     3.0      2.1     2.1      1.8     1.6      2.1     1.9
   (1) Spread on loans         2.1      2.7      3.1     4.3      4.6     5.3      2.6     2.1      2.9     2.1      2.1     2.8
     NFC                       2.3      3.4      4.0     3.7      4.5     5.3      2.3     2.2      3.0     2.0      2.0     2.5
     Households                2.0      2.1      2.3     4.8      4.7     5.3      2.9     2.0      2.8     2.2      2.2     3.1
      House purchase           0.9      1.0      1.1     2.9      2.0     2.7      2.3     1.4      2.1     1.6      1.3     2.5
      Cons. credit & other
                               6.3      6.9      7.8     9.1      8.5     9.1      4.6     4.0      5.3     4.5      4.6     5.2
      purp.
   (2) Spread on time
                               -0.7    -1.7      -2.4   -1.5     -2.4    -3.9     -1.4    -1.0     -2.2     -1.5    -1.4     -2.2
   deposits
   (2) Spread on total
                               -0.2    -0.9      -1.7   -0.5     -0.8    -2.3     -0.4     0.1     -1.1     -0.5     0.0     -1.0
   deposits
     memo: 6M Euribor
                               1.1      1.7      0.5
     (ma6)
 Sources: ECB and Banco de Portugal calculations.
 Notes: Spread on lending operations calculated as the difference between the interest rates on loans and the 6-month Euribor
 (6-month moving average in the case of outstanding amounts). Spread on borrowing operations is the difference between the
 6-month Euribor (the 6-month moving average in the case of outstanding amounts) and interest rates on deposits. Time deposits
 comprise deposits redeemable at notice and deposits with agreed maturity in the case of outstanding amounts and deposits with
 agreed maturity in the case of new business. Total deposits comprise overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and deposits
 with agreed maturity in the case of outstanding amounts.



In the second place, even though there has been a marked fall in the rate on new deposits, the average
cost of deposits for Portuguese banks is still affected by existing deposits captured when maturity terms
were longer and rates were higher (Chart 1). This results to a large extent from increased competition
in attracting customer funds during 2011, not only in terms of the interest rates offered, but also in the
extension of maturities, to which can be added the fact that the proportion of sight deposits is low in
comparison with other countries in the sample. The total cost of deposits held in Portugal is around 0.75
p.p. greater than in the other countries (except for Greece).

As a last point, and in spite of the steep fall in the margin on bank interest rates for customers, the
reduction in the margin implicit in all interest bearing assets and liabilities has been much less pronou-
nced (Chart 3). Some of the factors that have helped cushion the shift in the intermediation margin
with customers are the considerable ﬁnancing from the Eurosystem, and the increase in investments in
public debt securities.
                                          Chart 3
                                          INTEREST RATES SPREADS | PER CENT
I                                                                       With customers                                                                  Total

                                         7.00            Spread (rhs)          Credit    Deposits        3.50   7.00                                                                      3.50
                                                                                                                         Spread (rhs)                           Interest bearing assets
66                                                                                                                       Interest bearing liabilities

                                         6.00                                                            3.00   6.00                                                                      3.00
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         5.00                                                            2.50   5.00                                                                      2.50


                                         4.00                                                            2.00   4.00                                                                      2.00


                                         3.00                                                            1.50   3.00                                                                      1.50


                                         2.00                                                            1.00   2.00                                                                      1.00


                                         1.00                                                            0.50   1.00                                                                      0.50


                                         0.00                                                            0.00   0.00                                                            0.00
                                             2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012            2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012


                                          Source: Banco de Portugal.
BOX 2.3 | DIFFERENTIATION IN CREDIT TO NON-FINANCIAL
CORPORATIONS WITH CROSS-REFERENCING OF SIZE AND SECTOR OF
ACTIVITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
In the course of 2012, there was a slight fall in total credit to non-ﬁnancial corporations.1 This decrease                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          67
hides, however, different dynamics in terms of ﬁrm size and sector of activity. The aim of this Box is to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
contrast the evolution of credit aggregates in the case of the construction, real estate and trade sectors,
which have been particularly affected by the fall in domestic demand, with all the remaining sectors.
Chart 1 provides a breakdown of total credit to non-ﬁnancial corporations according to company size,
along with a separation of the sectors of activity in these two groups. The chart shows that the impor-
tance of these two groups on total credit to non-ﬁnancial corporations by ﬁrm size varies signiﬁcantly,
with construction, real estate and trade representing most of the credit to micro and small businesses,
whether the remaining sectors account for the majority of credit to medium-sized and large corporations.

An analysis of credit to these two groups (Chart 2) shows two very distinct proﬁles. While, credit for
construction, real estate and trade has posted annual negative rates of variation since the ﬁrst quarter
of 2010, the aggregate of all the other sectors is on a positive path, even though the curve has been
straightening over 2012.

The factors playing a part in the reduction of ﬁnancing for construction, real estate and trade can be
found both on the demand side, with the big dependence of these sectors on the domestic market,
and on the supply side, where there have been tighter restrictions on banking credit, in particular for
construction (Chart 3). It should be noted in this regard that the fact that these companies are generally
smaller, reduces the number of funding alternatives they have and makes them more dependent on
domestic banking credit. There is thus a relationship between the evolution of credit to non-ﬁnancial
corporations by sector of activity and company size. It is especially relevant to recognise this relationship,
given the different sectoral composition of credit by ﬁrm size. In the case of small and medium enterprises
(including micro ﬁrms), for example, the big proportion of credit granted to construction, real estate and


            Gráﬁco 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gráﬁco 2
            SECTOR DECOMPOSITION OF TOTAL CREDIT TO                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL CREDIT TO NON-FINANCIAL
            NON-FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS BY FIRM SIZE                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CORPORATIONS | ANNUAL RATE OF CHANGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20.0               Non-financial corporations (exc. construction, real estate and
                                                                                                                                                                                           79%
            45000                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100%                                                 trade)
                      67%
            40000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Construction, real estate and trade
            35000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15.0
Million euros




            30000                                                                                                                         69%

            25000                          33%
            20000                                                    52%                    48%                                                                                                                                                                            10.0
                                                                                                                     31%                                              21%
            15000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Per cent




            10000
             5000                                                                                                                                                                                                      0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5.0
                0
                                         NFC (excl. construction,




                                                                                         NFC (excl. construction,




                                                                                                                                         NFC (excl. construction,




                                                                                                                                                                                         NFC (excl. construction,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NFC (excl. construction,
                    real Estate, trade




                                                                    real Estate, trade




                                                                                                                    real Estate, trade




                                                                                                                                                                    real Estate, trade




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    real Estate, trade
                                          real estate and trade)




                                                                                          real estate and trade)




                                                                                                                                          real estate and trade)




                                                                                                                                                                                          real estate and trade)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          real estate and trade)
                      Construction,




                                                                      Construction,




                                                                                                                      Construction,




                                                                                                                                                                      Construction,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Construction,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -5.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2011




                                Micro                                           Small                               Medium-sized                                               Large                                Non-financial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      holdings                                                        Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Feb


            Source: Banco de Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Source: Banco de Portugal
            Notes: The data presented excludes trade credit given that this                                                                                                                                                                                                Notes: The annual rate of change is calculated as the rate of
            is not available by sector of activity and ﬁrm size. Last observa-                                                                                                                                                                                             change of the outstanding amounts of total credit to non-ﬁ-
            tion: February 2013.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nancial corporations. The data presented excludes trade credit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           given that this is not available by sector of activity and ﬁrm size.

1 See the deﬁnition of total credit in “Section 2.2 Monetary and ﬁnancial conditions of the Portuguese economy”,
  of this Report.
                                              Chart 3
                                              SURVEY ON FIRM DIFFICULTY IN ACCESSING BANK CREDIT | PERCENTAGE OF FIRMS INDICATING DIFFICULTY IN
                                              ACCESSING BANK CREDIT
I
                                                                                                                                       60               Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                        Services
68                                                                                                                                                      Construction
                                                                                                                                       50
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                                                       40


                                                                                                                            Per cent   30



                                                                                                                                       20



                                                                                                                                       10



                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                 2009 2009 2009 2010 2010 2010 2010 2011 2011 2011 2011 2012 2012 2012 2012
                                                                                                                                                   I   III IV     I   II III IV       I   II III IV       I   II III IV


                                              Source: INE
                                              Note: Percentage of ﬁrms indicating access to ﬁnance as one of the main constraints to the development of their economic activity.




                                         trade ends up determining the evolution of credit to these companies (Chart 4). Nevertheless, disaggre-
                                         gating total credit in those two groups previously referred, it is observed that total credit to non-ﬁnancial
                                         corporations, excluding construction, real estate and trade, though showing a negative annual rate of
                                         change throughout 2012, registered a signiﬁcant acceleration in the second semester. Additionally, the
                                         quarterly ﬂow is positive since January 2013.2




                                              Chart 4
                                              TOTAL CREDIT TO SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (INCLUDING MICRO FIRMS)
                                                                                         Annual rate of change                                                                                                                                      Quarterly ﬂow
                                               20.0                Non-financial corporations (exc. construction, real estate and trade)                                                                              4 000        Non-financial corporations (exc. construction, real estate and trade)
                                                                   Construction, real estate and trade                                                                                                                             Construction, real estate and trade

                                               15.0                                                                                                                                                                   3 000


                                               10.0                                                                                                                                                                   2 000
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Million euros
                                         Per cent




                                                    5.0                                                                                                                                                               1 000



                                                    0.0                                                                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1 000
                                                    -5.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                               -2 000
                                            -10.0
                                                            2008
                                                                    2009
                                                                           2009
                                                                                  2009
                                                                                         2009
                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                       2010
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                     2010




                                                                                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                                                                                                                                               2013
                                                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                                                     2011
                                                                                                                                                            2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                               -3 000
                                                           Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Feb                                                                                            Dec-10 Mar-11 Jun-11 Sep-11 Dec-11 Mar-12 Jun-12 Sep-12 Dec-12



                                              Source: Banco de Portugal                                                                                                                                          Source: Banco de Portugal
                                              Notes: The annual rate of change is calculated as the rate of                                                                                                      Note: The quarterly ﬂow was not seasonally adjusted given
                                              change of the outstanding amounts of total credit to non-ﬁ-                                                                                                        that there are very few observations available. Last observation:
                                              nancial corporations. The data presented excludes trade credit                                                                                                     February 2013.
                                              given that this is not available by sector of activity and ﬁrm size.



                                         2 The quarterly ﬂow is not adjusted for seasonality since there are only a very few observations available.
A broader and more extended in time analysis suggests that the tighter credit standards by resident
banks on loans to the construction and real estate sectors should not be dissociated from the signiﬁcant
growth in credit to these sectors in the years prior to the current recession and from the adjustment
process currently ongoing (Chart 5). Given that the accumulated exposure by the banking sector to the                                                                                                                                                                                             2
typical construction and real estate borrower remains substantially above the one recorded in other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  69
sectors and that the amount of credit to the typical company of other sectors also continues to decline,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ECB Monetary Policy and Monetary and Financial Conditions in the Portuguese Economy
it is expected that the adjustment tends to continue for some more time.

The differentiation between these two groups as regards the amount of credit granted should be related
to their different risk proﬁle. In this sense, Chart 6 shows that the deterioration of ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial position
and corresponding materialisation of credit risk, although cross to most sectors of activity, was especially
pronounced in the construction, real estate and trade sectors. This increase is particularly relevant given
that, together, these sectors account for about 70 percent of total bank loans to non-ﬁnancial corpora-
tions in default, but only 45 percent of total bank loans to non-ﬁnancial corporations.




                 Chart 5                                                                                                                                                                          Chart 6
                 BANK EXPOSURE TO THE TYPICAL FIRM                                                                                                                                                OVERDUE AND OTHER DOUBTFUL BANK LOANS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  TO NON-FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS | DEFAULT
                                                                                                                                                                                                  RATIO

                                                                          Trade                          Construction                                  Other sectors                                          Default ratio (Feb 12)            Default ratio (Feb 13)
                                                     0.9                                                                                                                                                      Share in total loans              Share in total loans in default
                                                                                                                                                                                                      18.00                                                                       80
Estimated typical exposure (logarithmic scale, Mar




                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      16.00                                                                       70
                                                     0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                      14.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      12.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                           Per cent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Per cent
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10.00
                     1995=0)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                     0.4                                                                                                                                               8.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                     0.3                                                                                                                                               6.00

                                                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                       4.00

                                                     0.1                                                                                                                                               2.00                                                                       10

                                                       0                                                                                                                                               0.00                                                                       0
                                                            1995
                                                                   1996
                                                                          1997
                                                                                 1998
                                                                                        1999
                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                                                                    2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Total           Construction, real     Other sectors
                                                     -0.1                                                                                                                                                                         estate and trade


                 Source: Banco de Portugal                                                                                                                                                        Source: Banco de Portugal
                 Note: See deﬁnition of typical ﬁrm in Antunes, A. e Martinho,                                                                                                                    Note: The default ratio is deﬁned as total loans overdue for
                 R. (2012), “Access to credit by non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms”, Banco de                                                                                                                     more than 30 days and other doubtful loans expressed as a
                 Portugal, Financial Stability Report – May.                                                                                                                                      percentage of the loans balance adjusted for securitisation.
3. Fiscal Policy and situation1                                                                                            3

Public ﬁnance developments are inﬂuenced by several factors related to the macroeconomic environment,                      71
demography, the legal and institutional context, ﬁscal policy decisions, among others. Thus, the ﬁscal




                                                                                                                           Fiscal Policy and Situation
adjustment undertaken within the scope of the Economic and Financial Assistance Programme should
be framed by the speciﬁcities of the current period. In particular, the sharp contraction in economic
activity in recent years ampliﬁes the relevance of the analysis of the effects of the cyclical position of
the economy on various budgetary items. Additionally, it is crucial to take into account other effects of
a transitory nature, following the analytical framework used in the context of the Stability and Growth
Pact. Finally, it is also important to analyse the structural developments of the different budgetary items
in the context of the information on the expected impact of ﬁscal measures.


In 2012, fiscal policy continued to show a markedly restrictive nature, against a backdrop of a
consolidation effort of unprecedented magnitude

In 2012, the general government deﬁcit in national accounts amounted to 6.4 per cent of GDP (4.4
per cent in 2011) - Table 3.1. The 2012 ﬁscal deﬁcit corrected for the impact of temporary measures
and special factors stood at 6.0 per cent of GDP, which compares to 7.1 per cent in 2011 (“Box 3.1
Temporary measures and special factors with an impact on the 2012 fiscal outturn”, of this Report).
Banco de Portugal estimates, based on the cyclical adjustment methodology adopted in the Eurosystem,
show that in 2012 the evolution of economic activity has given a strong negative contribution to ﬁscal
developments. In particular, the estimate for the change in the cyclical component of the ﬁscal balance
stands at -2.0 percentage points (p.p.) of GDP.2 Therefore, the structural balance also adjusted for the
impact of special factors recorded in 2012 a 3.1 p.p. of GDP improvement vis-à-vis 2011. As interest
expenditure continued to record an increase as a percentage of GDP, the change in the structural primary
balance amounted to 3.4 p.p. of GDP. Thus, the ﬁscal policy stance was clearly restrictive and pro-cyclical
(Chart 3.1). It is noteworthy that, in cumulative terms, the change in this indicator, used to measure the
ﬁscal effort, shows a very signiﬁcant adjustment between 2010 and 2012, whose magnitude amounted
to 7.2 p.p. of GDP.


To a large extent, the improvement in the structural primary balance stemmed from a decline
in public expenditure

Chart 3.2 shows that the 2012 ﬁscal adjustment essentially stemmed from a decline in structural primary
expenditure, while structural revenue remained at a level close to the observed in the previous year (for
additional details, see “Box 3.2 Composition of the structural fiscal adjustment in Portugal under the
Economic and Financial Assistance Programme”, in this Report).




1 In the analysis carried out in this chapter references to structural values are corrected for the cyclical effects, as
  well as for the impact of temporary measures and special factors. The latter correspond to operations that do
  not ﬁt the deﬁnition of temporary measures adopted in the Eurosystem, but that, in the speciﬁc cases conside-
  red, have a transitory negative impact on the general government balance. Note, however, that the structural
  ﬁgures include the impact in 2012 of the suspension of payment of Christmas and summer bonuses to part of
  the public sector workers and pensioners, a measure that will be reverted following decisions by the Constitu-
  tional Court.
2 It should be mentioned that this ﬁgure is more negative than the estimate obtained without taking into account
  the effects of the composition of economic growth (-1.3 per cent of GDP).
                                                          Table 3.1
                                                          MAIN FISCAL INDICATORS | PERCENTAGE OF GDP
      I                                                                                                                                                                        2010                                                      2011              2012       2011-2012                    2010-2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       change(d)                    change(d)
                                                          Overall balance                                                                                                       -9.8                                                         -4.4           -6.4          -2.0                           3.4
72
                                                          Temporary measures(a)                                                                                                 1.7                                                           3.9            0.6          -3.4                           -1.2
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                          Special factors(b)                                                                                                    -2.8                                                         -1.2           -1.0            0.2                          1.9
                                                          Overall balance excluding temporary measures and
                                                          special factors                                                                                                       -8.7                                                         -7.1           -6.0            1.1                          2.7
                                                          Cyclical component                                                                                                    1.7                                                           0.8           -1.1          -2.0                           -2.8
                                                          Structural balance excluding special factors(c)                                                                      -10.4                                                         -8.0           -4.9            3.1                          5.6
                                                          Interest expenditure                                                                                                  2.8                                                           4.1            4.4            0.3                          1.6
                                                          Structural primary balance excluding special factors                                                                  -7.6                                                         -3.9           -0.5            3.4                          7.2

                                                          Public debt                                                                                                          94.0                                                     108.3             123.6           15.3                       29.6
                                                          Change in public debt (in p.p.)                                                                                      10.3                                                          14.3          15.3                -                            -
                                                                                      Contribution of primary balance                                                           7.0                                                           0.4            2.0               -                            -
                                                                                      Differential between the effects of interest and of GDP
                                                                                      growth                                                                                    0.7                                                           5.0            8.1               -                            -
                                                                                      Deﬁcit-debt adjustments                                                                   2.6                                                           8.9            5.2               -                            -
                                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                          Notes: (a) According to the deﬁnition adopted in the Eurosystem. See “Box 3.1 Temporary measures and special factors with an
                                                          impact on the 2012 fiscal outturn”, of this Report. (b) Special factors are operations that transitorily affect the general government
                                                          deﬁcit, but cannot be treated as temporary measures according to the deﬁnition adopted in the Eurosystem. See “Box 3.1 Temporary
                                                          measures and special factors with an impact on the 2012 fiscal outturn”, of this Report. (c) Structural ﬁgures are adjusted for the
                                                          impacts of the cycle and temporary measures. The cyclical components and temporary measures are computed by Banco de Portugal
                                                          according to the methodologies adopted in the Eurosystem. (d) Changes do not necessarily correspond to differences in values as a
                                                          ratio to GDP due to rounding.


                                         Structural primary expenditure decreased for the second consecutive year. This evolution was related
                                         to signiﬁcant savings in key items, particularly as regards compensation of employees, intermediate
                                         consumption and investment. The decrease in compensation of employees was primarily due to a decline
                                         in the number of public sector employees and to the suspension of payment of summer and Christmas
                                         bonuses. In the case of pension expenditure, the impact of the suspension of the bonuses was offset by



                                                          Chart 3.1                                                                                                                            Chart 3.2
                                                          FISCAL POLICY AND CYCLICAL POSITION: 1996-                                                                                           CHANGE IN STRUCTURAL REVENUE AND
                                                          2012 | PERCENTAGE POINTS OF GDP                                                                                                      PRIMARY EXPENDITURE: 1996-2012 | PERCENTAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                               POINTS OF TREND GDP


                                                                                       6.0 Pro-cyclical tightening                                                                                                                    3.0 Deterioration
                                                                                                                                                           Counter-cyclical                                                                                 09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of the
                                                                                             of fiscal policy                                           tightening of fiscal                                                              structural
                                                                                                                                                                     policy                                                           2.0 primary
                                                                                                                                                                                       Change in the structural primary expenditure




                                                                                       4.0
                                         (change in the structural primary balance)




                                                                                                                12                 11                                                                                                     balance                           08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    98   01    96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0                                                   05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00      04
                                                                                       2.0
                                                                                                                                                  06                                                                                                                                 97 99
                                                       Fiscal stance




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0                                        03     10 02
                                                                                                                                  02                   07       10
                                                                                       0.0                                              05 96      99                                                                                                                                 07
                                                                                                                      03                           97
                                                                                                                                        01 04       00 98                                                                             -1.0                                                     06
                                                                                      -2.0                                                 08

                                                                                           Counter-cyclical                                                                                                                           -2.0                                                                  11
                                                                                                                                                              Pro-cyclical
                                                                                           loosening of fiscal                                          loosening of fiscal
                                                                                      -4.0 policy
                                                                                                                                                                    policy                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -3.0
                                                                                                                     09                                                                                                                                                                        Improvement of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 structural primary
                                                                                      -6.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                 balance
                                                                                          -5.0              -3.0              -1.0             1.0               3.0                                                                  -4.0
                                                                                                                             Cyclical position (a)                                                                                        -3.0            -2.0     -1.0            0.0             1.0           2.0
                                                                                                                           (change in the output gap)                                                                                                               Change in structural revenue




                                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                                                                  Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                          Nota: (a) The cyclical position of the economy is assessed by
                                                          the change in the output gap, which represents the difference
                                                          between GDP and trend GDP growth rates.
this item’s speciﬁc dynamic and by outlays referring to banking sector pension payments which are now
a responsibility of Social Security. Overall, the suspension of summer and Christmas bonuses generated
a 2.0 p.p. of GDP decline in expenditure, explaining, on net terms, a 1.3 p.p. of GDP reduction in the
2012 structural primary deﬁcit.3 Note that this measure will be reverted in 2013, following decisions by                  3
the Constitutional Court.4
                                                                                                                          73
In turn, after a very signiﬁcant increase in 2011, structural revenue as a percentage of trend GDP recorded




                                                                                                                          Fiscal Policy and Situation
in 2012 a moderate growth. This outcome derived from a slight decline in the structural tax burden that
occurred despite the fact that consolidation measures included in the State Budget for 2012 led to a
rise in taxation, especially as regards the Value Added Tax (VAT) (Chart 3.3). In fact, there was a decrease
in tax revenue that is not explained by the usual factors and that, to a certain extent, may arise from
methodological difﬁculties in capturing nonlinear cyclical effects, as well as from an overestimation of
the impact of changes in legislation.


The deficit in national accounts stood above the target, whilst the limits set for the public
accounts deficit and the stock of public debt were respected

In the context of the ﬁfth review of the Programme, which took place in August 2012, the ﬁscal perfor-
mance criteria were revised. The target for the 2012 ﬁscal deﬁcit on a national accounts basis was set
at 5.0 per cent of GDP (4.5 per cent of GDP in the initial Memorandum of Understanding). The gap
between the ofﬁcial target and the ﬁscal outturn (that amounts to 1.4 p.p. of GDP) is almost entirely
explained by special factors of a transitory nature, whose impact in national accounts (1.0 per cent of
GDP) had not been anticipated (“Box 3.1 Temporary measures and special factors with an impact on the
2012 fiscal outturn”, of this Report). The 2012 ﬁscal outturn is underpinned by a growth of tax revenue
considerably lower than implicit in the State Budget for 2012 and by a higher than anticipated increase
in social transfers to households. However, these developments were largely offset by savings in most
expenditure items that were very concentrated at the end of the year. It is worth mentioning that in the
beginning of 2013 the ofﬁcial targets for the general government deﬁcit in 2013-2015 were relaxed
again and set at 5.5, 4.0 and 2.5 per cent of GDP, respectively (these ﬁgures compare to 4.5, 2.5 and
1.9 per cent of GDP, deﬁned in August 2012) (Chart 3.4).

Regarding the 2012 ceilings for the public accounts deﬁcit and for the stock of public debt, they were also
revised and set at, respectively, 9,028 and 180,000 million euro. In both cases, the limits were respected.5




3 This ﬁgure corresponds to the Banco de Portugal estimate for the savings in primary expenditure net of the
  resulting decline in receipts of taxes on households’ income and wealth and social contributions.
4 According to its Ruling 353/2012, of 20 July 2012, the Constitutional Court declared as unconstitutional the
  suspension of payment of Christmas and summer bonuses to part of public employees and pensioners (mea-
  sures included in the State Budget of 2012), but stated that such decision would not take effect in 2012. In the
  2013 State Budget, the government introduced the partial reversal of the suspension starting in January 2013.
  However, in Ruling 187/2013, of 5 April 2013, the Constitutional Court declared as unconstitutional the mea-
  sure included in the Budget for 2013 and determined the total revoke of the suspension with back-date effects
  to January.
5 The provisional ﬁgure for the general government deﬁcit on a public accounts basis and in accordance with the
  deﬁnition used for assessing the respective performance criterium stood at 8,329 million euro. With respect to
  the stock of public debt, the ﬁgure computed using the criteria set under the Programme is 177,181 million
  euro. Note that the deﬁnition of public debt that is relevant for assessing the criterium does not coincide with
  the one used within the scope of the Excessive Deﬁcit Procedure, since the former excludes: (i) debt contracted
  for banking recapitalizations; (ii) IGCP (Portuguese Treasury and Debt Management Agency) deposits; (iii) the
  prepaid margin on European Financial Stability Facility loans; (iv) revisions to the stock of debt used to set up the
  ceiling; and (v) the impact of the revaluation of debt at the “Programme exchange rates” (applicable on May 5,
  2011).
                                                                Chart 3.3                                                                         Chart 3.4
                                                                                                                (a)
                                                                STRUCTURAL TAX BURDEN AND PRIMARY                                                 FISCAL BALANCE PROJECTIONS
                                                                EXPENDITURE(b) : 1995-2012
      I
                                                                        50           Structural tax burden      Structural primary expenditure
74
                                                                        48
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                        46
                                         As a percentage of trend GDP




                                                                        44

                                                                        42

                                                                        40

                                                                        38

                                                                        36

                                                                        34

                                                                        32

                                                                        30
                                                                             1995   1997   1999   2001       2003     2005   2007   2009   2011



                                                                Source: Banco de Portugal.                                                        Sources: Greece – “Medium term ﬁscal strategy 2013-2016;
                                                                Notes: (a) The tax burden includes taxes and social contribu-                     Ireland – Update of the Stability Programme; Italy - Update of
                                                                tions, adjusted for the impact of the economic cycle and the                      the Stability Programme; Portugal – Ministry of Finance; Spain
                                                                effect of temporary measures. (b) Primary expenditure is ad-                      – “Biannual Budget Plan 2013-2014”.
                                                                justed for the impact of the economic cycle and the effect of                     Notes: In the case of Portugal, the outturn for the 2010-2012
                                                                temporary measures and special factors (“Box 3.1 Temporary                        period is corrected for the impact of temporary measures and
                                                                measures and special factors with an impact on the 2012 fiscal                    other special factors, according to Banco de Portugal estimates.
                                                                outturn”, of this Report).                                                        The values for Ireland and Spain exclude the impact of measu-
                                                                                                                                                  res related to the assistance to the ﬁnancial sector.




                                         The increase in the stock of public debt resulted in a non-negligible growth of interest
                                         expenditure, despite the decline of the implicit interest rate

                                         According to the deﬁnition adopted in the context of the Excessive Deﬁcit Procedure, in 2012 expenditure
                                         on public debt interest payments increased by 4.7 per cent, which represents a marked slowdown vis-à-vis
                                         the previous year’s growth (43.1 per cent). The stock of public debt continued to record a very signiﬁcant
                                         increase, particularly as regards the stock held by non-residents, reﬂecting the funding obtained under
                                         the Programme. Thus, the deceleration in interest expenditure essentially stemmed from a decline in the
                                         implicit interest rate on public debt6, from 4.0 per cent, in 2011, to 3.7 per cent, in 2012 (see Chart 3.5).
                                         This development beneﬁted from the primary market issuance of Treasury Bills at progressively lower rates
                                         over the course of the year, as well as from the fact that the relatively low-rate loans obtained under
                                         the Programme were the main source of long run ﬁnancing of the Portuguese Republic (Chart 3.6). In
                                         fact, in 2012, interest costs associated with the Programme loans accounted for about 20 per cent of
                                         the overall spending on public debt interest, with the equivalent annual interest rate standing at 2.6 per
                                         cent. This ﬁgure represents a decrease vis-à-vis the interest rate computed for the amounts received in the
                                         previous year, for which contributed the elimination, in mid-2011, of the ﬁnancial margins on the loans
                                         granted by the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Financial Stabilization Mechanism.



                                         6 The implicit interest rate on public debt is computed as the ratio between interest expenditure for the year and
                                           the simple average of the stock of debt at the end of the same and preceding years.
                  Chart 3.5                                                                                         Chart 3.6
                  PUBLIC DEBT AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP,                                                               INTEREST RATE ON TREASURY BILLS ISSUANCES
                  IMPLICIT INTEREST RATE ON PUBLIC DEBT AND
                  GROWTH RATE OF NOMINAL GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                                      Stock held by residents                                                                    Less than 120 days         Between 120 and 210 days
                         140          Stock held by non-residents                         8                              6.5     Between 210 and 390 days   More than 390 days




                                                                                                                                                                                             Fiscal Policy and Situation
                                      Implicit interest rate (right-hand scale)
                                      Nominal GDP growth rate (right-hand scale)
                         120
                                                                                          6                              5.5
As a percentage of GDP




                         100
                                                                                          4                              4.5




                                                                                                            Percentage
                                                                                               Percentage
                          80
                                                                                          2                              3.5

                          60
                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                          0
                          40

                                                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                          -2
                          20

                                                                                                                         0.5
                          0                                                               -4                                   Jan- Mar- May- Jul- Sep- Nov- Jan- Mar- May- Jul- Sep- Nov-
                               2007      2008      2009       2010      2011       2012                                         11 11 11 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 12 12



                  Source: Banco de Portugal.                                                                        Source: IGCP.
                  Note: The implicit interest rate on public debt is computed as
                  the ratio between interest expenditure for the year and the sim-
                  ple average of the stock of debt at the end of the same and
                  preceding years.


The rise in the public debt ratio stemmed from the negative evolution of the Portuguese
economy combined with the growth of interest expenditure, but it also reflects the impact of
significant deficit-debt adjustments

At the end of 2012, the gross public debt ratio (compiled in accordance with the Excessive Deﬁcit Proce-
dure deﬁnition) reached 123.6 per cent of GDP. In comparison to 2011, this ﬁgure corresponds to a rise
in public debt by 15.3 p.p. of GDP. In cumulative terms, in the ﬁrst two years of the Programme, there
was an increase by 29.6 p.p. of GDP (Table 3.1 ).

The downturn in economic activity gave a strong contribution for the increase in the public debt ratio
in 2011 and 2012, with a cumulative impact of 4.7 p.p. of GDP in the two years (Chart 3.7). This effect
was reinforced by the signiﬁcant increase in expenditure on public debt interest payments (8.4 p.p. of
GDP in the same period). To a smaller extent, the existence of primary deﬁcits, particularly in 2012, also
partially explains the change in the debt ratio (2.4 p.p. of GDP in the two years, in cumulative terms). It
should also be mentioned the large magnitude of deﬁcit-debt adjustments, both in 2011 (8.9 per cent
of GDP) and 2012 (5.2 per cent of GDP), reﬂecting a signiﬁcant accumulation of general government
assets (especially as regards deposits and securities other than shares) (“Box 3.3 Deficit-debt adjustments
in the context of the Economic and Financial Assistance Programme”, in this Report).


In 2012, Portugal stood out among euro area countries for its particularly tight fiscal policy
stance

In 12 out of the 17 euro area Member-states, the change in the 2012 budget balance was underpinned
by the implementation of pro-cyclical and restrictive ﬁscal policy (Chart 3.8). However, the intensity of
the consolidation effort substantially differs across euro area countries, among which it is worth highli-
ghting the sharp (above 2 p.p.) increases in the structural primary balance recorded in Portugal, Italy,
Spain, Greece and Slovenia. After Greece, Portugal also stands out for having recorded in 2012 the most
signiﬁcant negative change in the output gap.
                                                          Chart 3.7                                                                                            Chart 3.8
                                                          BREAKDOWN OF THE CHANGE IN THE PUBLIC                                                                FISCAL POLICY AND CYCLICAL POSITION IN THE
                                                          DEBT RATIO                                                                                           EURO AREA IN 2012
      I
                                                                              Economic growth effect                      Right-hand                                                               Pro-cyclical tightening                                      Counter-cyclical
76                                                                20          Interest expenditure effect                    scale                                                                 of fiscal policy                                          tightening of fiscal
                                                                              Primary balance effect                                      65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          policy
                                                                              Deficit-debt adjustments                                                                                       4.0
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                              Change in debt                                              55




                                                                                                                                                (change in the structural primary balance)
                                                                  15                                                                                                                                                      PT(b)
                                                                                                                                          45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IT
                                         In p.p. of nominal GDP




                                                                  10                                                                      35                                                                                                         ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EL
                                                                                                                                                                                             2.0




                                                                                                                                                              Fiscal stance
                                                                                                                                          25                                                                                        SI
                                                                  5                                                                                                                                                                  FR         DE SK
                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CY                                 EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NL                AT                      IE
                                                                                                                                          5                                                                                                BE
                                                                  0                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                          -5                                                                                                     MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Counter-cyclical                        LU
                                                                                                                                          -15                                                      loosening of fiscal
                                                                  -5                                                                                                                                                                            FI                  Pro-cyclical
                                                                                                                                                                                                   policy                                                     loosening of fiscal
                                                                                                                                          -25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          policy
                                                        -10                                                                               -35                                                -2.0
                                                                       2007      2008    2009     2010      2011   2012   Cum.:   Cum.:                                                          -4.0         -3.0           -2.0        -1.0         0.0             1.0      2.0
                                                                                                                          2000-   2011-                                                                                                      Cyclical position (a)
                                                                                                                          2010    2012                                                                                                   (change in the output gap)




                                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                                  Sources: European Commission and Banco de Portugal.
                                                                                                                                                               Notes: (a) The output gap is measured according to calcula-
                                                                                                                                                               tions by the European Commission, except in the case of Portu-
                                                                                                                                                               gal, for which the ﬁgure was computed by Banco de Portugal.
                                                                                                                                                               (b) Taking into account the methodology adopted in the Eu-
                                                                                                                                                               rosystem and correcting the change in the structural primary
                                                                                                                                                               deﬁcit for the impact of special factors.




                                         However, similarly to what occurred in most euro area countries, public debt remained at
                                         very high levels

                                         In 2012, the euro area public debt ratio continued in a rising path, reaching 92.7 per cent of GDP by the
                                         end of the year. Between the end of 2010 and the end of 2012, the public debt ratio to GDP increased
                                         by 7.1 p.p. in the euro area. The increase in this ratio is chieﬂy explained by the differential between the
                                         effects of interest and of economic growth (3.3 p.p.), but the impacts of deﬁcit-debt adjustments (2.1
                                         p.p.) and of the cumulative primary deﬁcits in 2011 and 2012 (1.7 p.p.) are also signiﬁcant. However,
                                         the relative contribution of these components differed greatly across the analysed countries (Chart 3.9).
                                         Regarding the effects of deﬁcit-debt adjustments, these were signiﬁcantly positive in Cyprus, Portugal
                                         and Ireland. In turn, deﬁcit-debt adjustments gave a contribution for the decline in the public debt ratio
                                         to GDP in Greece, since they mirror the reduction of the public debt ratio resulting from the private
                                         sector involvement in the restructuring of public debt. As regards the effect of the differential between
                                         the impacts of interest and of GDP growth, it was very signiﬁcant in Greece, Portugal and Italy. The
                                         magnitude of the cumulative primary deﬁcits in these two years had a particularly considerable effect in
                                         the change of the public debt as a percentage of GDP in Ireland and Spain.
Chart 3.9
BREAKDOWN OF THE CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN THE PUBLIC DEBT RATIO IN THE EURO AREA: 2011 AND
2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                      Deficit-debt adjustments
                                                                      Interest expenditure effect - Impact of economic growth
                                                                      Primary balance effect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    77
                                                        50            Change in debt




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fiscal Policy and Situation
                                                        40

                                                        30
                               In p.p. of nominal GDP
                                                        20

                                                        10

                                                         0

                                                        -10

                                                        -20

                                                        -30

                                                        -40
                                                                                              Estonia


                                                                                                                  Greece


                                                                                                                                   France
                                                                                                                                            Italy
                                                                                                                                                    Cyprus




                                                                                                                                                                                               Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Slovakia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Finland
                                                              Euro area
                                                                          Belgium
                                                                                    Germany


                                                                                                        Ireland


                                                                                                                           Spain




                                                                                                                                                             Luxemburg


                                                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                         Malta




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Portugal
Source: European Commission.
Box 3.1 | Temporary measures and special factors with an
  impact on the 2012 fiscal outturn

Temporary measures and special factors have had a significant impact on the fiscal developments of the               3
past few years. Table 1 presents a detailed list of the temporary measures and special factors for the period
2010-2012, quantifying their effects on the fiscal balance. The analysis developed in this box is focused            79
on measures and factors with an impact on the general government national accounts data for 2012.1




                                                                                                                     Fiscal Policy and Situation
According to the Eurosystem definition, four temporary measures were adopted in 2012, with a total
impact on the fiscal balance of 0.6 per cent of GDP. One of these measures resulted from the remaining
effects of the Personal Income Tax (PIT) surcharge of 50 per cent on the Christmas bonus in excess of the
minimum wage2 and had a non recurrent positive impact in current revenue (amounting to 0.1 per cent
of GDP). Positively affecting the capital tax revenue was the one-off tax collection related to the third
special taxation scheme for undeclared income from capital held abroad, with an impact of 0.2 per cent
of GDP. Furthermore, the transfer of assets from the Banco Português de Negócios (BPN) pension fund
to the general government, which affected capital revenue by 0.1 per cent of GDP, was also classified
as a temporary measure. Lastly, the tender for the sale of fourth generation mobile phone licenses,
which was recorded as negative capital expenditure in line with national accounts procedures, was also
classified as a temporary measure (amounting to 0.2 per cent of GDP).

In addition to the temporary measures referred to above, there are several special factors which corres-
pond to transactions with a one-off effect on the general government deficit but that cannot be treated
as temporary measures in conformity with the Eurosystem definition. Three transactions were classified
as special factors with an impact on the 2012 general government fiscal balance on a national accounts
basis. These transactions, with a positive effect on capital expenditure, include the reclassification as
general government capital transfers of the equity injections in Sagestamo, SGPS, S.A. and Caixa Geral
de Depósitos (each one amounting to 0.5 per cent of GDP)3 and the upward revision (0.1 per cent of
GDP) of the value of impairments of BPN recorded in the balance sheets of the special purpose vehicles
included in the general government consolidation perimeter.




1 For a complete description of temporary measures and special factors for 2010 and 2011, see Banco de Portugal
  Annual Reports of 2010 and 2011.
2 In the final Personal Income Tax assessment this surcharge was calculated as 3.5 per cent of annual taxable
  income, deducted by the minimum wage.
3 The Sagestamo, SGPS operation refers to subordinated loans given by PARPÚBLICA, SGPS in 2010. As the result
  of the reclassification of these transactions as equity injections in 2012 they were recorded as general govern-
  ment capital transfers and therefore had an impact on that year’s fiscal balance.
                                         Table 1
                                         IMPACT OF TEMPORARY MEASURES AND SPECIAL FACTORS ON THE FISCAL OUTTURN | IN PERCENTAGE OF
      I                                  GDP

                                                                                                                                            2010         2011        2012
80                                                                                                                                           1.7          3.9         0.6
                                         Temporary measures (A)
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         Transfer of pension funds' assets                                                                   1.6         3.5         0.1

                                         Proceeds from concessions                                                                           0.1          -            -

                                         Extraordinary Personal Income Tax surcharge on the Christmas bonus                                   -          0.5         0.1

                                         Special taxation schemes for undeclared income from capital held abroad                             0.1          -          0.2

                                         Tender for the sale of 4G licenses                                                                   -           -          0.2

                                         Special factors (B)                                                                                 2.8         1.2         1.0

                                         Delivery of two submarines                                                                          0.5          -            -

                                         Reclassification of PPP contracts                                                                   0.5         0.1           -
                                                      (a)
                                         BPN effect                                                                                          1.0         0.4         0.1

                                         BPP effect(b)                                                                                       0.3          -            -

                                         Madeira effect                                                                                      0.6         0.5           -

                                           Via Madeira - reclassification                                                                     -          0.2           -

                                           SESARAM - calling of guarantees                                                                    -          0.2           -

                                           Settlement of Regional Government debt                                                            0.6         0.1           -

                                         Recapitalization of the fund for the support of the NHS payment system                               -          0.3           -

                                         Reclassified equity injections                                                                       -           -          0.9

                                           CGD                                                                                                -           -          0.5

                                           Sagestamo                                                                                          -           -          0.5

                                         Impact on the fiscal balance: (C) =(A) - (B)                                                        -1.1        2.7         -0.4
                                         Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                         Notes: (a) In 2010, the “BPN effect” reflects the assumption of Banco Português de Negócios impairments by special purpose vehi-
                                         cles classified within general government. In 2011, it refers to the recapitalisation of Banco Português de Negócios, under the scope
                                         of the respective reprivatisation process. In 2012, the impact reported relates to the upward revision of the impairments assumed in
                                         2010. (b) The “BPP effect” reflects the calling of a guarantee granted by the State to a loan to Banco Privado Português.
BOX 3.2 | COMPOSITION OF THE STRUCTURAL FISCAL ADJUSTMENT
IN PORTUGAL UNDER THE ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAMME
                                                                                                                      3
The purpose of this box is to examine the developments of the main items of revenue and expenditure,                  81
in light of the theoretical framework of the disaggregated approach, used in the context of the Euro-




                                                                                                                      Fiscal Policy and Situation
pean System of Central Banks.1 This methodology is useful as it allows a quantification of the impacts
of different factors affecting the main budgetary items. Moreover, it enhances transparency in as much
as it focuses the analysis of the budgetary developments on the structural evolution of the fiscal varia-
bles2 by excluding the transitory impacts stemming from the economic cycle and temporary measures.

Regarding the cyclical adjustment, each revenue and expenditure item that is deemed to be influenced
by the economic cycle is corrected on a case-by-case basis applying a constant elasticity to deviations
of the respective macroeconomic base from its trend, measured in real terms.3 This methodology can,
therefore, take into account the composition effects of economic growth. On the expenditure side, only
unemployment benefits are considered as being influenced by macroeconomic developments. Regar-
ding temporary measures and special factors, it is assumed that they correspond to the figures used by
Banco de Portugal for the analysis of public finances. Finally, it is important to note that the structural
levels of the different categories of revenue and expenditure are expressed as a percentage of nominal
trend GDP,4 rather than nominal GDP, in order to ensure consistency with the cyclically adjusted figures
in the numerator.

To sum up, the analysis in this box shows that the structural fiscal adjustment in 2011 and 2012 funda-
mentally arise from spending cuts, and, to a lesser extent, from revenue increases. In fact, during this
period and despite the introduction of tax measures with a significant estimated impact on fiscal deve-
lopments, mostly regarding indirect taxation, the tax measures for 2012 did not have the impact initially
envisaged. Moreover, the main revenue items in 2011 and 2012 were heavily penalized by the evolution
of their specific cyclical components, a fact which widened the discrepancy between actual and structural
fiscal developments. As for the factors determining the structural reduction in primary expenditure, there
was an across the board decline, affecting the major expenditure items, with the exception of pensions.
Nonetheless, an important part of the measures that in 2012 contributed to this reduction in spending
will be reverted in 2013, following decisions by the Constitutional Court.


    Main components of revenue: structural developments in 2011 and 2012

The most recent developments in fiscal revenue have been influenced by the introduction of a series of
structural tax policy measures whose impact on revenue was expected to be quite significant. According
to official estimates, in the years 2011 and 2012 this impact (named legislation changes in Table 1) would
amount to 3.6 percentage points (p.p.) of trend GDP, with the 2012 measures accounting for 2.0 p.p.
(see Table 1). However, after a very substantial increase in the structural tax burden as a percentage of
trend GDP in 2011 (1.6 p.p.), in 2012 this aggregate was nearly stable (-0.1 p.p.). Over the two years, the
permanent tax legislation changes focused on indirect taxation, which accounted for around 2/3 of the


1 See Kremer et al., (2006), “A disaggregated framework for the analysis of structural developments in public
  finances”, ECB, Working paper no. 579; and Braz, C., (2006), “The calculation of cyclically adjusted balances at
  Banco de Portugal: an update”, Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin - Winter.
2 The structural level of a given budgetary item is the observed figure, deducted by the cyclical component and
  corrected for temporary measures and special factors.
3 See Bouthevillain et al., (2001), “Cyclically adjusted budget balances: an alternative approach”, ECB, Working
  paper series no 77.
4 Defined as the product of GDP deflator for real trend GDP, estimated by applying the Hodrick-Prescott filter with
  a smoothening parameter (γ ) equal to 30.
                                         Table 1
                                         CHANGES IN GENERAL GOVERNMENT REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ADJUSTED FOR CYCLICAL
                                         EFFECTS, TEMPORARY MEASURES AND SPECIAL FACTORS | PERCENTAGE POINTS OF NOMINAL TREND GDP
      I
                                                                                                                                                                    Cum.:
                                                                                                                              2011               2012
                                                                                                                                                                  2011-2012
82                                       Total revenue                                                                        1.7                 0.3                2.0
                                          Taxes on households' income                                                         0.3                 0.2                0.6
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                            Fiscal drag                                                                       -0.1                0.0                -0.1
                                            Decoupling of the macroeconomic base from GDP                                     0.0                -0.1                -0.1
                                            Legislation changes                                                               0.3                 0.4                0.8
                                            Residual                                                                          0.1                -0.1                0.0
                                          Taxes on firms' income                                                              0.5                -0.3                0.2
                                            Fiscal drag                                                                       0.0                 0.0                0.0
                                            Decoupling of the macroeconomic base from GDP                                     0.0                 0.1                0.1
                                            Legislation changes                                                               0.1                 0.2                0.3
                                            Residual                                                                          0.3                -0.5                -0.2
                                          VAT                                                                                 0.8                 0.6                1.3
                                            Fiscal drag                                                                       0.0                 0.0                0.0
                                            Decoupling of the macroeconomic base from GDP                                     0.2                 0.1                0.3
                                            Legislation changes                                                               1.0                 1.2                2.2
                                            Residual                                                                          -0.4               -0.8                -1.2
                                          Other taxes on production and imports                                               0.0                -0.1                0.0
                                            Fiscal drag                                                                       0.0                 0.0                0.0
                                            Decoupling of the macroeconomic base from GDP                                     0.0                 0.0                0.0
                                            Legislation changes                                                               0.1                 0.1                0.2
                                            Residual                                                                          -0.1               -0.2                -0.3
                                          Social contributions                                                                0.0                -0.6                -0.6
                                            Fiscal drag                                                                       0.0                 0.0                0.0
                                            Decoupling of the macroeconomic base from GDP                                     0.2                 0.1                0.2
                                            Legislation changes                                                               0.1                 0.0                0.1
                                            Residual                                                                          -0.3               -0.7                -0.9
                                            Memo item: included in expenditure(a)                                             -0.4               -0.5                -0.9
                                          Overall taxes and social contributions                                              1.6                -0.1                1.5
                                            Fiscal drag                                                                       -0.1                0.0                -0.1
                                            Decoupling of the macroeconomic base from GDP                                     0.4                 0.1                0.6
                                            Legislation changes                                                               1.6                 2.0                3.6
                                            Residual                                                                          -0.4               -2.3                -2.6
                                            Memo item: included in expenditure(a)                                             -0.4               -0.5                -0.9
                                          Other revenue(b)                                                                    0.1                 0.5                0.5
                                            of which: from the EU                                                             -0.4                0.2                -0.2
                                         Primary expenditure                                                                  -2.1               -3.1                -5.3
                                          Primary current expenditure                                                         -1.3               -2.5                -3.8
                                            Social payments                                                                   -0.1               -0.1                -0.2
                                              of which: Pension payments                                                      0.5                 0.0                0.5
                                              Unemployment benefits                                                           0.0                 0.1                0.2
                                              Social benefits in kind                                                         -0.3               -0.1                -0.4
                                            Compensation of employees                                                         -1.0               -1.8                -2.8
                                            Intermediate consumption                                                          0.0                -0.3                -0.3
                                            Subsidies                                                                         -0.1               -0.1                -0.1
                                            Other current expenditure                                                         -0.1               -0.3                -0.4
                                         Capital expenditure                                                                  -0.8               -0.7                -1.5
                                          Investment                                                                          -0.7               -0.5                -1.2
                                          Other capital expenditure                                                           -0.5                0.0                -0.5
                                         Source: Banco de Portugal.
                                         Notes: (a) Part of the residual of actual social contributions related with social contributions of the civil servants system and imputed
                                         social contributions, both recorded on the expenditure side under the item compensation of employees. (b) Includes other current
                                         revenue, sales and capital revenue.
overall impact of tax measures. Over the same period, direct taxation on households’ and firms’ income
increased, in structural terms, by 0.8 p.p. of trend GDP, while indirect taxation revenue rose by 1.3 p.p..

A breakdown of the change of the ratio of total tax and social security contributions to trend GDP is
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
presented in Chart 1. In terms of the 2012 fiscal developments5, there was a broad array of structural
changes in legislation affecting this aggregate, the most important being the changes in Value Added                                                                                             83
Tax (VAT) lists which accounted for nearly half of this impact (1.0 p.p.). However, the effects of the




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fiscal Policy and Situation
implementation of these measures were partially offset by a revenue change which cannot be explained
by the usual factors (-1.8 p.p).6 This residual may arise in part from the combination of the limitations
of the chosen approach in capturing non-linear cyclical effects, which might occur in specific contexts
like the current one, with a possible over-estimation of the positive impact of legislation changes. The
discrepancy between the nominal trend growth rates of macroeconomic bases and GDP had a relatively
minor positive impact on the evolution of tax revenue in 2012. Chart 2 presents the impact of the diffe-
rent explanatory factors on the structural evolution of the main taxes and social security contributions
as a ratio of trend GDP in 2012.

In 2012, actual revenue from taxes on households’ income dropped by 6.6 per cent, partially due to
the pro-cyclical and quite negative evolution of the private sector wage bill, used as macroeconomic base
for this revenue item. In structural terms, revenue from these taxes went up by 3.2 per cent (correspon-
ding to 0.2 p.p. of trend GDP), as it is corrected for temporary measures which had a more substantial
impact in 2011 (0.5 p.p.) than in 2012 (0.1 p.p.) (“Box 3.1 Temporary measures and special factors with
an impact on the 2012 fiscal outturn”, of this Report.). As for structural changes in the Personal Income
Tax legislation, an impact of 0.4 p.p. of trend GDP on tax revenue is estimated (after 0.3 p.p. in 2011),
essentially stemming from the introduction of an overall ceiling on tax credits in the two highest income
brackets, along with the complete convergence of the taxation of income from pensions to the rules in


             Chart 1                                                                                       Chart 2
             BREAKDOWN OF THE OVERALL CHANGE                                                               BREAKDOWN OF THE CHANGE IN STRUCTURAL
             IN STRUCTURAL TAXES AND SOCIAL                                                                TAXES AND SOCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS IN 2012(a)
             CONTRIBUTIONS(a)

                           Changes in legislation                                                                          Changes in legislation
                           Decoupling between the macro base and GDP (in nominal trend terms)                              Decoupling between the macro base and GDP (in nominal trend terms)
                           Impact of the tax elasticity                                                                    Impact of the tax elasticity
                           Residual                                                                                        Residual
                           Overall structural taxes and social contributions                                               Total
                                                                                                                    1.5
                    5.0

                    4.0
                                                                                                p.p. of trend GDP




                                                                                                                    1.0
p.p. of trend GDP




                    3.0

                    2.0                                                                                             0.5
                    1.0

                    0.0                                                                                             0.0

                    -1.0
                                                                                                                    -0.5
                    -2.0

                    -3.0
                                                                                                                    -1.0
                    -4.0                                                                                                     Taxes on      Taxes on       VAT       Other taxes     Social
                              Average       2010         2011         2012       Cumulative                                 households' firms' income              on production contributions
                             1998-2009                                           2011-2012                                    income                                and imports



             Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                           Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
             Note: (a) For more details on the methodology underlying the                                  Note: (a) For more details on the methodology underlying the
             calculation of these contributions see Kremer et al., (2006) and                              calculation of these contributions see Kremer et al., (2006) and
             Braz, C., (2006).                                                                             Braz, C., (2006).

5 For a detailed analysis of fiscal developments in 2011, see “Chapter 3 Fiscal Policy and Situation”, Banco de
  Portugal, Annual Report - 2011.
6 The residual from taxes and social contributions amounts to -2.3 p.p. of trend GDP but a fraction of it (-0.5 p.p.)
  is explained by the reduction of civil servants’ social contributions, considered as not having a cyclical effect in
  the methodology adopted.
                                         force for labour income. Finally, the residual component did not present a more negative figure, given
                                         the increase in receipts from final withholding taxation on capital revenue and the decline in refunds.
                                         The rise in structural households’ income tax revenue in 2012, quantified above, should be seen in the
      I                                  context of developments which were already relevant in 2011. In fact, the structural evolution of this
                                         aggregate in 2011 and 2012 was similar, and resulted in a cumulative increase of 0.6 p.p. of trend GDP.
84
                                         In the first two years of the Programme, the structural revenue from taxes on firms’ income as a
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         percentage of trend GDP went up just by 0.2 p.p., with the substantial rise in 2011 (0.5 p.p.) being
                                         partially reversed in 2012. In fact, the structural revenue from taxes on firms’ income declined signifi-
                                         cantly (-8.8 per cent) though this was less important than its actual contraction (-16.0 per cent). The
                                         cyclical component of this tax, for which the considered macroeconomic base is private GDP, dropped
                                         by 0.3 p.p.. In spite of legislation changes with a positive estimated impact of 0.2 p.p. of trend GDP
                                         on Corporate Income Tax revenue (of which the most relevant were the introduction of a surcharge on
                                         profits, the elimination of tax exemptions and lower rates, and the setting of limits for deducting tax
                                         losses), the structural revenue of this tax dropped by 0.3 p.p. in 2012. The sizable value of the residual
                                         component outweighed the effects of legislative changes on this tax revenue. The magnitude of this
                                         residual may have come from the fact that the chosen macroeconomic base did not adequately capture
                                         the behaviour of taxable profits and additionally from the substantial increase in refunds.

                                         Revenue from VAT in 2012 increased by 6.2 per cent in structural terms, while there was a drop of 1.3 per
                                         cent in actual revenue. The cyclical component of this tax declined by 0.6 p.p. of GDP in 2012, reflecting
                                         the shrinking of private consumption and leading to a significant discrepancy between the structural
                                         and the actual evolution of this aggregate. As in 2011, the positive outturn of this tax structural revenue
                                         took place due to a series of changes in legislation with a substantial initially estimated effect (1.2 p.p.
                                         of trend GDP). In fact, besides the above-mentioned restructuring of tax lists that led to an increase of
                                         the tax rate on goods and services which were previously subject to reduced or intermediate rates (with
                                         particular reference to the change in the VAT rate on restaurant services which increased from 13 to 23
                                         per cent) taking effect from January 2012, the collection of this tax reflected the remaining impact from
                                         the increase in the VAT rate on electricity and natural gas from 6 to 23 per cent, which came into force
                                         in October 2011. Also note the very negative residual in the breakdown of the structural change in this
                                         tax revenue (-0.8 p.p.), which in part may be due to the combination of non-linear effects that hamper
                                         an accurate measurement of cyclical effects with the high uncertainty surrounding the forecast of the
                                         impact of legislation changes, which may have led to its overestimation.

                                         The structural revenue from other taxes on production and imports dropped by 2.0 per cent in 2012,
                                         after a rise of 0.8 per cent in 2011. The structural evolution of this aggregate in 2012 resulted from a
                                         7.2 per cent decline in actual revenue and a negative change of the cyclical component (-0.3 p.p. of
                                         GDP). The legislation effects regarding these taxes amounted to 0.1 p.p. of trend GDP. More specifically,
                                         the actual revenue from the Tax on Oil Products declined by 8.2 per cent given that the large fall in the
                                         consumption of fuel (as shown by the significant contraction of petrol and diesel sales: -9.4 and -9.2 per
                                         cent, respectively) was mitigated by the introduction of a special tax on energy. With respect to the Tax
                                         on Vehicles Sales, no major relevant legislative changes were introduced, and the level of this tax revenue
                                         dropped very significantly (-42.2 per cent), with fewer motor vehicles being sold (sales went down by
                                         37.8 per cent for passenger vehicles, which account for around 80 per cent of this tax revenue). There
                                         was also a 6.5 per cent drop in the Tobacco Tax collection, despite the legislation changes introduced.
                                         Conversely, the changes introduced in real estate taxation, specifically a large cut in exemptions from
                                         the Municipal Tax on Real Estate, led to an 8.3 per cent rise in this tax collection. The revenue from the
                                         Stamp Duty and the Municipal Tax on Real Estate Transactions continued to show a downward trend,
                                         with growth rates of -8.4 and -18.0 per cent, respectively.

                                         After a quasi-stabilisation of revenue from social contributions in 2011, a 5.4 per cent structural reduc-
                                         tion took place in 2012 (-0.6 in p.p. of trend GDP), while its actual contraction reached 8.1 per cent. This
negative outcome was particularly noticeable in the case of imputed contributions, which went down
by 14.4 per cent, in line with the drop in the public sector wage bill.7 Actual contributions were also
affected by the above-mentioned reduction in the public sector wage bill and by the contraction in the
private sector wage bill, but recorded a smaller decline (-6.2 per cent). In terms of legislation changes,               3
only the lagged effects of the implementation of the new Social Security contributory code had some
                                                                                                                         85
impact on revenue from contributions. As for the residual component, it was essentially determined by




                                                                                                                         Fiscal Policy and Situation
the indirect effect of the suspension of bonuses for public sector employees, as explained in note 6.

Actual capital revenue had a very significant reduction in 2012 (-71.6 per cent) that was, however,
fundamentally determined by the previous year’s implementation of temporary measures, with a very
substantial base effect. Correcting the actual capital revenue for these effects, there was a structural
change of 7.4 per cent and a slight increase in the ratio of this item to trend GDP (0.1 p.p.). This comes
essentially as a result of an increase of 16.1 per cent in capital transfers from the European Union that
have general government entities as their final recipients. Compared with 2010, capital revenue has
shrunk, in structural terms, by 10.2 per cent.


    Main components of primary expenditure: structural developments in 2011 and
    2012

In the first two years of the Programme, structural primary current expenditure declined by 3.8 p.p.
of trend GDP, of which 2.5 p.p. were recorded in 2012 (Chart 3). This development essentially stemmed
from a reduction in outlays on compensation of employees, intermediate consumption and social trans-
fers in kind.

In fact, after a significant decrease in compensation of employees in 2011, largely resulting from an
average wage cut of 5 per cent, this expenditure item recorded a new reduction in 2012 (Chart 4). This
outcome has stemmed, to a large extent, from the suspension of the Christmas and summer bonuses
applicable to public sector employees with monthly salaries of 1,100 euro and above (progressive cuts
were applied to employees with salaries between 600 and 1,100 euro). Overall, in 2011 and 2012,
expenditure on wages and salaries dropped by 2.0 p.p. of trend GDP, also reflecting a sharp reduction
in the number of employees (approximately by 8 per cent).

The suspension of Christmas and summer bonuses to pensioners, similar to the one applicable to public
sector employees, generated savings amounting to 0.8 per cent of GDP in pension expenditure. However,
these savings were partially offset by an increase in outlays arising from the payment of pensions to
banking sector pensioners covered by the respective substitute scheme. These payments result from the
liabilities that Social Security assumed as a counterpart for the transfer in 2011 of assets from pension
funds of several financial institutions. In addition, the growth in the number of pensioners and the rise
in the average pension also contributed to an increase in this expenditure item. Thus, in 2012, pension
expenditure recorded a slightly negative change, remaining virtually unchanged as a ratio to GDP (Chart
3). Nonetheless, overall expenditure on social transfers in cash mildly accelerated vis-à-vis 2011, mostly
reflecting an increase in expenditure on unemployment benefits. In fact, while in 2011 these outlays
recorded a decline, in 2012 there was a 23.3 per cent rise, resulting from developments regarding the
respective cyclical component.8



7    In national accounts, employer contributions regarding public employees who are subscribers to the Caixa Ge-
    ral de Aposentações are recorded under imputed contributions at the rate of 28.43 per cent of the respective
    salaries.
8 Expenditure on unemployment benefits corrected for the impact of the economic cycle grew by 9.3 per cent in
  2012, marginally increasing as a ratio to trend GDP. The differential vis-à-vis this item’s actual growth stems from
  an increase in the respective cyclical component, which reflects the fact that the rise in the number of subsidised
  unemployed was sharper than the increase in its trend. In 2012, the average number of subsidised unemployed
  grew by 24.4 per cent on a year-on-year basis.
                                                       Chart 3                                                                                       Chart 4
                                                       BREAKDOWN OF THE CHANGE IN STRUCTURAL                                                         BREAKDOWN OF THE CHANGE IN GENERAL
                                                       PRIMARY EXPENDITURE(a)                                                                        GOVERNMENT WAGES AND SALARIES
      I
                                                                      Investment                        Other primary expenditure (b)                                       Change in the number of public employees
                                                                      Intermediate consumption          Pension expenditure                                                 Wage scale update
86                                                                    Wage bill                         Structural primary expenditure                                      Consolidation measures(a)
                                                                                                                                                                            Residual
                                                             2.0
                                                                                                                                                              5.0           Change in general government wages and salaries
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                             0.0
                                         p.p. of trend GDP




                                                                                                                                                              -5.0




                                                                                                                                         Percentage points
                                                             -1.0

                                                             -2.0                                                                                            -10.0

                                                             -3.0
                                                                                                                                                             -15.0
                                                             -4.0
                                                                                                                                                             -20.0
                                                             -5.0
                                                                                                                                                             -25.0
                                                             -6.0

                                                             -7.0                                                                                            -30.0
                                                                     Average      2010           2011           2012          Cum:                                   2008       2009       2010       2011      2012      Cum:
                                                                    1998-2009                                               2011-2012                                                                                   2011-2012



                                                       Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                           Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                       Notes: (a) The composition of primary expenditure is corrected                                Note: (a) This category includes the Banco de Portugal estima-
                                                       for the effects of the transformation of public hospitals into                                tes for the impacts stemming from the cut in general govern-
                                                       corporations in the 2002-2010 period, according to estimates                                  ment wages undertaken in 2011 (5 per cent, on average) and
                                                       by Banco de Portugal. (b) Other primary expenditure includes                                  from the suspension of summer and Christmas bonuses of part
                                                       social payments excluding pensions, general government social                                 of public sector employees in 2012.
                                                       contributions, subsidies and other current and capital expen-
                                                       diture.




                                         In addition, the implementation of several measures affecting the health sector (specifically as regards
                                         medicines’ co-payments and prices) contributed to the reduction in expenditure on social benefits in kind.
                                         This effect was reinforced by a cut in payments for services provided by corporate hospitals. Moreover,
                                         it is worth highlighting the decline in expenditure on intermediate consumption that, although partially
                                         explained by across-the-board rationalisation efforts, also reflects a sharp spending retrenchment in the
                                         last quarter of 2012. There was, furthermore, a reduction in current transfers to firms resulting from a
                                         drop in compensatory payments to State-owned enterprises classified outside the general government
                                         sector and from a decline in expenditure on interest relief subsidies related to mortgages.

                                         In 2011 and 2012, general government capital expenditure recorded a substantial decrease in struc-
                                         tural terms. In particular, after decreasing by 22.0 per cent in the previous year, this expenditure item
                                         declined by 23.5 per cent in 2012 which represents an overall fall of 1.5 p.p. of trend GDP in the two
                                         years. These developments are primarily explained by the decline in public investment and, to a lesser
                                         degree, by the reduction in capital transfers. Indeed, the general government gross fixed capital formation
                                         recorded a cumulative reduction of 1.2 p.p. of trend GDP in 2011 and 2012 (Chart 3). In 2012, public
                                         investment decreased by 23.2 per cent on a year-on-year basis, essentially reflecting the cuts undertaken
                                         by enterprises classified in the Autonomous Services and Funds subsector, particularly as regards Parque
                                         Escolar, EPE and Rede Ferroviária Nacional – REFER, EPE. Regarding capital transfers, there was also a
                                         significant decline, by 26.7 per cent, which may have been linked to a reduction in national co-financing
                                         for projects funded by the European Union.
BOX 3.3 | DEFICIT-DEBT ADJUSTMENTS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAMME

                                                                                                                           3
In the initial Programme1, the projection for public debt as a ratio to GDP assumed that it would reach a
maximum of 106.8 per cent in 2013, after which it would follow a downward path (Chart 1). The more                         87
recent projection, made public within the scope of the seventh review of the Programme, takes into




                                                                                                                           Fiscal Policy and Situation
account the sharp rise in the stock of debt recorded in 2012 and assumes that the ratio to GDP peaks
in 2014, falling below 120 per cent of GDP only after 2015. The upward revision of the projection for
the public debt ratio is only partially explained by the assumption of an economic outlook more adverse
than expected in mid-2011 and of a higher fiscal deficit. In fact, about ¾ of the revision is explained by
the additional impact of deficit-debt adjustments.2

At the end of 2010, the public debt ratio stood at 94.0 per cent of GDP and reached 123.6 per cent
by the end of 2012. About half of the cumulative change in the debt ratio in 2011 and 2012 can be
explained by the large magnitude of deficit-debt adjustments with a positive sign, which implies that the
public debt increased by more than what would have been expected given the fiscal and macroeconomic
developments. In cumulative terms, these adjustments amount to 14.1 per cent of GDP, reflecting a series
of financial operations with very distinctive characteristics in these two years (Chart 2).

In 2011, the deficit-debt adjustments (8.9 per cent of GDP) primarily stemmed from a sizeable asset
accumulation, resulting from a rise in general government deposits (by 6.0 per cent of GDP). This outcome
was much influenced by the amounts received in 2011 under the Programme that were not used in the
same year, as well as by the transfer to the general government sector of about half of the assets of
pension funds of several financial institutions. It should be highlighted that the remaining half of this
transfer (amounting to 1.6 per cent of GDP) only took place in 2012. It is depicted in chart 2 under the
heading that includes transactions in “other assets” and thus contributes to explain the change in debt
observed in 2011.

In 2012, the size of deficit-debt adjustments (5.2 per cent of GDP) can also be explained by an accumula-
tion of general government assets, but its composition differs from that of the previous year. In particular,
during this year, the growth of assets mostly refers to an increase in securities (excluding shares) related
to the impact of the issuance of contingent capital instruments (CoCo’s) within the scope of the reca-
pitalisation processes of several resident banks (3.1 per cent of GDP). Furthermore, it should be noted
that, after the steep increase in general government deposits in 2011, in 2012 there was an additional
accumulation of these assets, with the respective stock reaching 11.6 per cent of GDP by the year-end.3

On the opposite direction, there has been a drop in shares and other equity due to the sale of the airport
service concession to ANA - Aeroportos de Portugal. Indeed, the revenue from this operation (correspon-
ding to 0.7 per cent of GDP) was not recorded in the fiscal balance, as the transaction was statistically
treated as a decrease of holdings in the general government’s portfolio.

Lastly, it is important to highlight that the relatively small magnitude of the item referring to transactions


1 See the Fiscal Strategy Document of August 2011.
2 The deficit-debt adjustments explain the difference between the general government net borrowing or net
  lending (i.e. the fiscal balance) and the change in the stock of public debt. These adjustments are calculated
  as total transactions in financial assets net of the change in liabilities excluded from the Maastricht public debt
  definition. They further reflect other effects associated with changes in the volume and price of debt. Note that
  the liabilities not included in the Maastricht debt definition, which is the relevant definition in the context of the
  Excessive Deficit Procedure, are essentially derivatives and commercial debt.
3 It should be noted that this increase in the stock of general government deposits happened despite the fact that
  part of the fund for supporting the banking system capitalization has been used in 2012 through the issuance
  of CoCos. Therefore, the amounts already used are accounted for under the heading “securities other than
  shares”. The rise of the stock of deposits should be linked to the fact that these amounts were more than offset
  by new funding instalments received under the Programme throughout the year.
                                                          Chart 1                                                                                  Chart 2
                                                          PROJECTIONS FOR THE PUBLIC DEBT RATIO                                                    BREAKDOWN OF DEFICIT-DEBT ADJUSTMENTS
      I                                                           130   Trajectory foreseen in 2011
                                                                                                                                                            Transactions in loans and in securities other than shares(a)
                                                                                                                                                            Transactions in other assets net of transactions in other liabilities
                                                                        Observed figures and more recent projection                                         Transactions in shares and other equity
                                                                                                                                                            Transactions in currency and deposits
88                                                                125
                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                            Other effects(b)
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                                                                        8




                                                                                                                               As a percentage of GDP
                                         As a percentage of GDP




                                                                  120

                                                                                                                                                        6

                                                                  115
                                                                                                                                                        4

                                                                  110
                                                                                                                                                        2


                                                                  105
                                                                                                                                                        0


                                                                  100                                                                               -2
                                                                        2011          2012          2013         2014   2015                                         2011                                    2012


                                                          Sources: Banco de Portugal, INE and Ministry of Finance.                                 Source: Banco de Portugal.
                                                                                                                                                   Notes: (a) In 2012 the evolution of the general government
                                                                                                                                                   portfolio does not reflect the important privatization operations
                                                                                                                                                   that took place throughout the year. In fact, by the end of De-
                                                                                                                                                   cember 2012, the counterpart for the revenue obtained and
                                                                                                                                                   delivered by PARPÚBLICA to the State had not yet been settled,
                                                                                                                                                   thus the respective amounts are included in the Maastricht debt
                                                                                                                                                   and, therefore, have no impact on deficit-debt adjustments. (b)
                                                                                                                                                   This component mostly reflects asset valuation effects (in parti-
                                                                                                                                                   cular, the difference between interest paid and interest accrued,
                                                                                                                                                   the effects of the issuance and redemption of debt not at par
                                                                                                                                                   and the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on Maastricht
                                                                                                                                                   debt denominated in foreign currency), as well as effects of
                                                                                                                                                   changes in the volume of debt.




                                         in “other assets” net of transactions in liabilities excluding Maastricht instruments is concealing the impact
                                         of financial operations involving very significant amounts, but that partially cancel each other. On the
                                         one hand, there was a reduction in “other assets” as the part of the banking sector pension funds that
                                         was not transferred in 2011 was actually received by general government in 2012. This operation more
                                         than offset the impact on “other assets” of the recording of the proceeds obtained with the concession
                                         of airport service to ANA – Aeroportos de Portugal that had not yet been received by the end of 2012,
                                         as a counterpart for the above mentioned decrease in the portfolio of shares. In the opposite direction,
                                         there was a very significant decrease in other general government liabilities that essentially refers to the
                                         settlement of National Health Service arrears (recorded in previous years’ deficits) and to the payment
                                         of the capital injection undertaken in Banco Português de Negócios in 2011. In net terms, this set of
                                         operations led to an increase of public debt of approximately 0.4 per cent of GDP.
4. SUPPLY                                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                     89
Signiﬁcant contraction of economic activity in most sectors




                                                                                                                                     Supply
Gross value added (GVA) generated in the Portuguese economy in 2012 declined by 2.4 per cent, follo-
wing a 1.3 per cent drop in the previous year (Table 4.1). The decline in economic activity in Portugal
deepened after the ﬁrst quarter, in line with the pattern observed across the euro area during the year.
The contraction of GVA in Portugal was 1.8 per cent in the ﬁrst quarter, in year-on-year terms, while in
the following quarters it was up to an average of 2.6 per cent. The intra-annual proﬁle of the economic
sentiment indicator of the European Commission also portrays a worsening of activity in the last months
of 2012 (Chart 4.1).

The downward move in GVA was recorded in all sectors, deteriorating the scenario observed in 2011.
In particular, the industrial sector fell 2.6 per cent, after a 1.7 per cent rise a year earlier. In addition, the
downward path in construction continued, with a 15.8 per cent fall recorded in 2012. This performance
accentuated considerably the pattern observed over recent years, leading to an accumulated loss of
around 44 per cent in the level of activity in this sector since 1999 (Chart 4.2). It should be noted that
the contraction of activity in the construction sector reﬂects not only a cyclical component but, mostly,
a structural adjustment. Although there are different situations in construction segments, the current
number of dwellings per capita and the endowment of some types of public infrastructure suggests
that activity in these segments should not recover to the levels observed at the end of the nineties. In
the services sector, the negative move (-1.5 per cent) was across the board, with salient features being
“wholesale and retail sales, repair of motor vehicles, accommodation, and food service industries” (-1.8
per cent) and “transportation and communications (-2.6 per cent).




 Table 4.1
 GROSS VALUE ADDED | REAL GROWTH RATE, PERCENTAGE
                                                     Weights      2006      2007     2008     2009      2010     2011     2012
                                                     2010(b)

 Agriculture, hunting, forestry and ﬁshing                2.3      2.4      -4.6      3.1      -3.8      1.6      0.6      -1.0

 Industry                                                13.8      0.9       3.0     -1.5      -9.8      7.0      1.7      -2.6

 Electricity, gas and water                               3.9     11.0       1.1      4.0      -5.6      9.2     -2.6      -0.8

 Construction                                             6.3      -2.6      2.0     -4.9    -10.7      -5.4     -9.7    -15.8

 Services                                                73.8      1.9       3.1      1.1      0.3       1.2     -1.2      -1.5

     Trade repair, hotels and restaurants                18.7      1.9       1.3     -1.3      0.6       2.5     -1.2      -1.8

     Transports and communication                         8.5      4.8       6.8      2.7      -2.3      0.3     -1.6      -2.6

     Financial and real estate activities                15.3      5.1       4.8      2.8      1.2       1.1     -0.3      -0.9

     Other services                                      31.2      -0.3      2.3      1.2      0.3       0.8     -1.6      -1.3

 GVA(a)                                                 100.0      1.7       2.7      0.4      -2.2      1.9     -1.3      -2.4

 Memo

 GDP at market prices                                       --     1.4       2.4      0.0      -2.9      1.9     -1.6      -3.2

 Source: INE.
 Notes: (a) GVA is registered at base prices and differs from GDP at market prices because the latter includes, besides GVA of the
 various sectors, taxes on production and imports net of subsidies. (b) As a percentage of total GVA at current prices.
                                                         Chart 4.1                                                                                                          Chart 4.2
                                                         GVA AND ECONOMIC SENTIMENT INDICATOR                                                                               GROSS VALUE ADDED PER SECTOR | ACCUMULATED
                                                                                                                                                                            SINCE 1999
I
                                                                 140                                                    5                                                    130         GVA total
                                                                                                                                                                                         Industry
90                                                                                                                      4                                                                Construction




                                                                                                                             Year-on-year growth rate, percentage
                                                                 120                                                                                                         120         Services
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                              110
                                                                 100                                                    2
                                         Index 1990-2012 = 100




                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                    (1999 =100)
                                                                  80
                                                                                                                        0                                                         90
                                                                  60
                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                  80

                                                                  40                                                    -2
                                                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                        -3
                                                                        Quarterly GVA - year-on-year growth
                                                                  20    rate, percentage (rhs)                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                        -4
                                                                        Economic sentiment indicator(monthly)
                                                                  0                                                     -5                                                        50
                                                                  Jan-99 Jan-01 Jan-03 Jan-05 Jan-07 Jan-09 Jan-11 Jan-13                                                              99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10   11   12

                                                         Sources: European Commission and INE (quarterly accounts).                                                         Source: INE (quarterly accounts).




                                         A number of factors played a part in the markedly adverse economic activity developments of 2012.
                                         Firstly, the on-going adjustment process in the Portuguese economy has seriously affected the dynamics
                                         of domestic demand, both through the fall in disposable income and in the worsening of levels of conﬁ-
                                         dence. Secondly, the synchronization of adjustment efforts, speciﬁcally at the ﬁscal level, in a number of
                                         Portugal’s main trade partners limited external demand, especially in the context of the euro area (see
                                         “Chapter 1 International environment”, of this Report). It should be noted that GVA fell in the euro area
                                         by 0.4 per cent in 2012, against a 1.6 per cent growth a year before.


                                         The change in activity at the ﬁrm level tends to be quite heterogeneous

                                         Although there is a contraction in activity in aggregate terms, there are considerable differences at the
                                         ﬁrm level. As in other countries, the distribution of GVA levels across Portuguese ﬁrms shows a signiﬁcant
                                         dispersion, stemming from differences in size, sector, production technologies and other factors that are
                                         speciﬁc to each ﬁrm (Chart 4.3). Notwithstanding the high proportion of small ﬁrms, their share in terms
                                         of overall sales in the economy is relatively small. The skewness that is visible in the GVA distribution
                                         illustrates the difﬁculties in setting policies focused on the representative ﬁrm, since the average ﬁrm
                                         tends not to be representative of the distribution. In fact, in 2011 about 89 per cent of ﬁrms recorded
                                         a GVA that is lower than the average of the economy (290 thousand euros).

                                         Despite not being available for 2012, ﬁrm level data, shows that an important group of ﬁrms recorded
                                         positive GVA developments in 2009 and 2011, years when there was a fall in aggregate activity (Chart
                                         4.4). This fact is compatible with the restructuring of the Portuguese economy, which started before
                                         the international economic and ﬁnancial crisis. The success of this adjustment process depends on the
                                         existence of creative destruction, where those ﬁrms that are more productive and innovative succeed
                                         in gaining market share.

                                         Pursuing of a broad structural reform agenda, such as the one set out in the economic and ﬁnancial
                                         assistance programme, is a necessary condition for a reduction in the distortions that hamper the
                                         reallocation of productive factors to more dynamic and competitive sectors, leading to a structural fall
                                         in unemployment and increased growth in potential output.
 Chart 4.3                                                                                       Chart 4.4
 DISTRIBUTION OF GROSS VALUE ADDED, BY                                                           DISTRIBUTION OF GROSS VALUE ADDED
 FIRM, IN 2009 AND 2011 | IN EUROS                                                               GROWTH RATE, BY FIRM, FOR 2009 AND 2011 |
                                                                                                 PERCENTAGE
                                                                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                                                                       91
                          Median 2011                                   Average 2011




                                                                                                                                                                       Supply
                                                                                               Density
 Density




           -50000   0   50000   100000   150000   200000   250000   300000   350000   400000         -100   -80   -60   -40   -20      0   20     40   60   80   100

                                         2009               2011                                                                2009            2011




 Sources: INE, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance and Public                               Sources: INE, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance and Public
 Administration and Banco de Portugal calculations (IES).                                        Administration and Banco de Portugal calculations (IES).
 Notes: Gross value added consists in output deducted from                                       Note: The set of enterprises was truncated within the +/- 100
 intermediate inputs. Output comprises sales of goods and servi-                                 per cent range.
 ces, supplementary income, operational subsidies, work by the
 ﬁrm and change in stocks. Intermediate inputs include external
 supplies, cost of raw materials and indirect taxes. Observations
 below the ﬁrst percentile were excluded as well as ﬁrms repor-
 ting GVA above 400.000 euros, which corresponds to around
 9 and 8.4 per cent of the ﬁrms in 2009 and 2011, respectively.




A steep fall in conﬁdence is visible in a number of sectors

The move in conﬁdence indicators of the productive sectors is consistent with the sectoral developments
in the Portuguese economy during 2012 and with its intra-annual proﬁle. Conﬁdence indicators can be
smoothed and standardized so as to reﬂect the cyclical situation of activity in each sector or, in other
words, to assess the move in conﬁdence over and beyond the trend line. An analysis of these indicators
shows a general deterioration in conﬁdence in cyclical terms during the year (Chart 4.5). In terms of
construction, the cyclical move in conﬁdence is somewhat attenuated but it coexists with a very pronou-
nced trend deterioration.


Strong fall in employment during the year, against a backdrop of decline in total population
and active population

Employment in the Portuguese economy was down 4.2 per cent over the year. An analysis of the intra-
-annual proﬁle of employment shows that there were year-on-year falls of over 4 per cent during 2012
(Chart 4.6). The strong net job destruction is one of the most conspicuous aspects of the adjustment
process underway in the Portuguese economy. The destruction recorded in recent years has taken this
variable at year-end to levels similar to those recorded towards the end of the 1980s.

The labour market participation rate in 2012 was 73.9 per cent for the 15 to 64 age group, slightly down
on the ﬁgure for a year earlier. Among men, the rate fell 0.6 p.p., standing at 77.9 per cent, while among
women there was a rise of 0.3 p.p., bringing the ﬁgure to 70.1 per cent. The rate for the population as
a whole stood at 51.9 per cent.
                                          Chart 4.5
                                          INDICATORS OF THE EVOLUTION OF THE ECONOMIC CLIMATE IN PORTUGAL
I                                                          Economic Sentiment Indicator                                         Industry Confidence Indicator



92
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                             Month-on-month change                                                 Month-on-month change



                                                         Construction Confidence Indicator                                      Services Confidence Indicator




                                                             Month-on-month change                                                 Month-on-month change


                                          Sources: European Commission and computations by Banco de Portugal.
                                          Notes: The indicators of the evolution of the economic climate presented are computed basing on the information of the opinion
                                          surveys of the European Commission and resorting to a simple visualization tool (the Economic Climate Tracer) proposed by Gayer
                                          (2010), Report: The Economic Climate Tracer: A tool to visualise the cyclical stance of the economy using survey data. www.oecd.
                                          org/std/clits/39578745.pdf. This approach consists of the graphical representation of the standardized level of a smoothed indicator
                                          (using for instance the Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter, in order to eliminate short-term ﬂuctuations) on its month-on-month changes. The
                                          resulting diagrams can be divided into four quadrants, allowing in this way the association of the temporal evolution of the smoo-
                                          thed qualitative variables to the different phases of the business cycle: ﬁrst quadrant – expansion – when the standardized series is
                                          above its mean and increasing; second quadrant – downswing – when the standardized series is above its mean but decreasing; third
                                          quadrant – recession – when the standardized series is below its mean and decreasing; and the fourth quadrant – upswing – when
                                          the standardized series is below its mean but increasing.




                                         According to the INE employment survey, the country’s total population was down 0.4 per cent in 2012,
                                         while the active population was down by 0.9 per cent (Chart 4.6). This fall is very signiﬁcant in historical
                                         terms as it accentuates the trend towards deceleration visible over recent years. This is the result of the
                                         deterioration in the cyclical position of the economy, the dynamics of migratory ﬂows and the aging
                                         process.

                                         It is not easy to assess the recent dynamics of migratory ﬂows since there are no accurate statistics in this
                                         ﬁeld. There is a variety of reasons for this – the seasonal aspect of some emigration, the free movement
                                         of individuals in the EU and the difﬁculty in collating information on residence permits in extra-community
                                         countries. The rise in emigration has been spurred by the large increase in unemployment and by the
                                         growth of some emerging and developing market economies. In contrast, emigration to EU countries
                                         tends to be dampened by their worsening economic and labour market conditions. It should be noted
that emigration is typically self-sustained, since the costs of moving and settling in a foreign country
go down as the emigrant community expands. There are also features related to imitation and family
regrouping that accentuate the process.
                                                                                                                                                                                               4

Job destruction is higher than the fall in economic activity                                                                                                                                   93




                                                                                                                                                                                               Supply
The comparison between the move in employment and private GDP suggests a structural change in the
relationship between these two variables over recent years (Chart 4.7). The fact that levels of job destruc-
tion are clearly above the fall in economic activity indicates an adjustment that looks to be permanent,
with a reduced incidence of labour hoarding. Moreover, job destruction has been pushed up by the
slump in sectors that are relatively more labour intensive. The structural effects may also be occurring
through job destruction in sectors that are relatively less productive. In sectoral terms, according to the
INE employment survey, the reduction of jobs in construction during the year was very high (-18.9 per
cent) and clearly higher than in manufacturing (-5.4 per cent).

In terms of employment by status and type of contract, there were fewer jobs for employees (4.9 per
cent), particularly with ﬁxed-term contracts (down 12.6 per cent). The number of self-employed was
down 5.9 per cent for those acting as employers, whereas the fall was very slight for those working
without employees (0.2 per cent). This move is associated to the economic cycle, which generates a
destruction of temporary labour relations.




       Chart 4.6                                                                                 Chart 4.7
       EMPLOYMENT, TOTAL POPULATION AND                                                          GROWTH OF PRIVATE GDP AND PRIVATE
       LABOUR FORCE | YEAR-ON-YEAR GROWTH RATE                                                   EMPLOYMENT (FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT(a))

             3.0                                                                                                   4.0

                                                                                                                   3.0
                                                                      Private employment growth rate, percentage




             2.0                                                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                   2.0
             1.0
                                                                                                                   1.0                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                       2008               1999
             0.0                                                                                                                                                 2006 2007
Percentage




                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                      2005
             -1.0                                                                                                  -1.0                           2003
                                                                                                                                          2011
             -2.0                                                                                                  -2.0                                              2010

                                                                                                                   -3.0   2009
             -3.0    Labour force
                     Total population
                                                                                                                   -4.0          2012
             -4.0    Employment
                                                                                                                   -5.0
             -5.0                                                                                                      -4.0        -2.0          0.0           2.0          4.0          6.0
                    99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10   11   12                                                                     Real GDP growth rate, percentage


       Sources: INE (Employment survey) and calculations by Banco                                Sources: INE (Employment survey) and calculations by Banco
       de Portugal.                                                                              de Portugal.
       Note: Employment and labour force corrected for the series                                Notes: Private sector employment is deﬁned as total employ-
       break of 2011.                                                                            ment excluding estimates by Banco de Portugal for employ-
                                                                                                 ment in the general government and public hospitals converted
                                                                                                 into public corporate entities. Private GDP is calculated as total
                                                                                                 GDP less compensation and ﬁxed capital consumption of the
                                                                                                 general government and public hospitals converted into public
                                                                                                 corporate entities, adjusted for the number of hours worked.
                                                                                                 Therefore, the number of hours worked equivalent to full time
                                                                                                 corresponds to one job. From 2007 to 2012, the private em-
                                                                                                 ployment series is based on the assumption that the average
                                                                                                 number of hours worked per worker remained unchanged.
                                         A very high unemployment rate, especially for younger age groups

                                         In 2012 the unemployment rate reached a very high level (15.7 per cent), with a 3 p.p. rise year-on-
I                                        -year, in a context where the output gap became clearly negative (Chart 4.8). The unemployment rate
                                         among the young was 37.7 per cent, a 7.6 p.p. increase over 2011. The rise in the structural rate of
94                                       unemployment has been clear since 2000 and it is one of the most salient and serious developments in
                                         the Portuguese economy, bringing to the surface dysfunctionalities in the adjustment capacity of the
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         labour market (Chart 4.9).

                                         The number of unemployed was up by around 22 per cent in the year. In addition, the increase in the
                                         number of unemployed augmented as the year went by, a situation that was only turned around in the
                                         last quarter. The strong inﬂow of newly unemployed led to a stabilization of the average unemployment
                                         duration (Chart 4.10). However, there was an increase in unemployment duration among the younger
                                         age groups, though staying below the average duration in the entire set of unemployed. Long-term
                                         unemployment (more than 12 months) stood at 54.1 of total unemployment (Chart 4.11), a ﬁgure that is
                                         clearly higher than the average over the last decade. Unemployment duration has important repercussions
                                         on productivity and on future labour market developments, to the extent that absence from work for a
                                         long time tends to cause a big drain on human capital and the loss of personal skills.


                                         Real wages down again in the private sector

                                         The change in private sector real wages, deﬂated on the basis of prices for private consumption, was
                                         negative in 2012, with a 2.2 per cent drop recorded, against a backdrop of a further increase in the
                                         unemployment rate (Chart 4.12). The distribution of wages in worker-company relationships provides a
                                         way to identify the structure effects not visible in this variable for the economy as a whole. According to
                                         information on employer-employee wages, the big fall in employment in 2012, again justiﬁed by a large
                                         reduction in new contracts, was associated to an increase in the share of workers with lower wages and
                                         a reduction in average wages in various sectors of the Portuguese economy. Also clear in this context is
                                         the high rotation of workers with low wages, contributing to reduce the average wage in the economy


                                          Chart 4.8                                                                                     Chart 4.9
                                                                (a)
                                          OUTPUT GAP                  AND UNEMPLOYMENT RATE                                             OBSERVED AND STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT
                                                                                                                                        RATE
                                                                                17                                                            16        Unemployment rate
                                                                                              Unemployment rate(%)
                                                                                16                                                                      Structural unemployment rate
                                                       2012                     15                                                            14
                                                                                14
                                                                                13                 2011                                       12
                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                 Percentage




                                                                                11                                                            10
                                                                       2009     10
                                                                                                                   2007                       8
                                                                      2005       9
                                                                                       2006
                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                    2008                      6
                                                         2003                    7
                                                                      2004
                                                                                 6                2002
                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                 5                                        2000
                                                                                                         1999     2001
                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                 3
                                         -2.5   -2.0   -1.5     -1.0     -0.5        0.0   0.5     1.0      1.5     2.0    2.5
                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                Output gap (%)                                                     85     88     91     94     97      2000   03   06   09   12


                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                           Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                          Notes: Unemployment rate corrected for the series break of                                    Notes: The methodology associated with the computations
                                          2011. (a) Hodrick-Prescott, ﬁlter with smoothing parameter                                    of the structural unemployment rate is described in “Unem-
                                          λ=30.                                                                                         ployment: Supply, Demand, and Institutions”, The Portuguese
                                                                                                                                        Economy in the Context of Economic, Financial and Monetary
                                                                                                                                        Integration, Chapter 4, Economics and Research Department,
                                                                                                                                        Banco de Portugal.
                     Chart 4.10                                                                                                                           Chart 4.11
                     UNEMPLOYMENT DURATION | MONTHS                                                                                                       TOTAL UNEMPLOYMENT AND LONG-TERM
                                                                                                                                                          UNEMPLOYMENT(a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
30                                                                15 to 24 years                                                                                                         60
                                                                  25 to 34 years                                                                                                                                                                                          95




                                                                                                                                            Long-term unemployment, as a percentage of
                                                                  Total                                                                                                                                                                             2010
25                                                                                                                                                                                       55




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Supply
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2011    2012
                                                                                                                                                                                         50                             2005         2007
20




                                                                                                                                                        total unemployment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                         45         2000                                    2009
15

                                                                                                                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                                                                                         40
10                                                                                                                                                                                                2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                         35
          5

                                                                                                                                                                                         30
          0                                                                                                                                                                                   3            5            7             9            11        13   15
                                                              99 2000 01      02   03     04   05   06   07    08    09   10    11    12                                                                   Unemployment rate, percentage


                     Source: INE (Employment survey).                                                                                                     Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                                                                                                                          Note: Unemployment rate corrected for the series break of
                                                                                                                                                          2011.


in 2012 (Chart 4.13). According to data from Social Security, 26.7 per cent of new jobs in October 2012
were offering wages of less than 500 euros. In addition, 24.1 per cent of the jobs that existed in October
2011 but no longer so twelve months later were paying less than this amount.

The comparison between the move in real wages and productivity in the private sector shows a negative
differential for the last three years taken as a whole (Chart 4.14). This is in line with the developments seen
in economic activity and the labour market, and is part of the process of correction of macro-economic
imbalances in the Portuguese economy. However, as in 2011, the private consumption deﬂator was
higher than the private GDP deﬂator (2.1 and 1.4 per cent respectively), implying that the real cut in


                            Chart 4.12                                                                                                                       Chart 4.13
                            UNEMPLOYMENT RATE AND WAGES IN THE                                                                                               WAGE DISTRIBUTION OF WORKER FLOWS
                            PRIVATE SECTOR | REAL                                                                                                            BETWEEN 2011 AND 2012 | REGULAR WAGE,
                                                                                                                                                             NUMBER OF WORKERS’ FLOWS

                                                         6                                                                                           140000
 Real wages in the private sector (annual growth rate)




                                                                                                                                                     120000
                                                                                                    2009
                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                     100000
                                                                           1999

                                                                                                                                                               80000
                                                                                          2007
                                                         2
                                                                                        2005
                                                                    2000                                       2010                                            60000
                                                                    2001           2003          2008
                                                         0                                                                                                     40000
                                                              2             2002        7 2004 2006           12                       17
                                                                                                                                                               20000

                                                         -2                                                                    2012
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                            Unemployment rate (%)                                                                                         400      500   600      700       800   900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500
                                                                                                              2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Euros

                                                         -4                                                                                                                                                                  Hires             Separations


                            Sources: INE and calculations by Banco de Portugal.                                                                              Sources: Social Security (data of October 2011 and 2012) and
                                                                                                                                                             calculations by Banco de Portugal.
                            Note: Unemployment rate corrected for the series break of                                                                        Notes: Hires – Number of workers in a ﬁrm at 2012 that did
                            2011.                                                                                                                            not work in that ﬁrm in the previous year. Separations - Number
                                                                                                                                                             of workers in a ﬁrm at 2011 that do not stay working in that
                                                                                                                                                             ﬁrm in the following year.
                                         wages was lower for companies than for workers. In nominal terms, wages per worker in the private
                                         sector were down (-0.1 per cent), in tandem with a rise in productivity of 1.1 per cent, leading to a fall
                                         of 1.2 per cent in the unit labour cost (see “Chapter 6 Prices”, of this Report). In the whole economy, the
I                                        unit labour cost was down 3.8 per cent in nominal terms, as a result of the pronounced shift in salaries
                                         in general government (see “Chapter 3 Fiscal Policy and Situation”, of this Report).
96
                                         Nevertheless, payroll costs tend to be non-dominant in ﬁrm’s total costs. Payroll costs make up on average
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         almost a third of the operating costs for Portuguese companies, but in around a quarter of all companies
                                         this proportion is above 40 per cent. The proportions of different types of costs vary according to the
                                         sector and are subject to different degrees of short-term rigidity (see “Box 4.1 Cost structure and proﬁt
                                         margins of Portuguese ﬁrms”, of this Report).


                                         A decline in per capita output and contraction in the stock of capital, which is tied in with the
                                         falls seen in investment

                                         In 2012 per capita output was down 2.8 per cent, following the 1.7 per cent decline in the previous year.
                                         As in 2011, this move stemmed in great part from the negative contribution of labour (2.5 per cent),
                                         associated with a fall in employment and, to a lesser extent, in the activity rate (Chart 4.15).

                                         As for capital, its contribution for per capita output growth was virtually nil for 2012, as it was in 2011.
                                         This stemmed from a contraction estimated as 0.5 per cent of the capital stock, connected with the
                                         markedly negative move in gross ﬁxed capital formation in 2012 (Chart 4.16) (see “Chapter 5 Demand”,
                                         of this Report). Notwithstanding the fact that the measurement of the capital stock is particularly difﬁcult
                                         and depends on assumptions for the rate of depreciation, the existence of a negative rate of variation
                                         in this variable means that the economy will tend to have more problems in adopting new production
                                         technologies, which potentially allow for increases in total factor productivity. This analysis is especially
                                         signiﬁcant when the contraction of capital stock is visible in machinery and equipment. In the case of
                                         Portugal this situation goes hand in hand with a low level of capital per worker when compared with
                                         advanced economies, in line with the relatively low level of human capital in the active population (Chart
                                         4.17).

                                                Chart 4.14                                                                                               Chart 4.15
                                                CHANGE IN REAL WAGES AND APPARENT                                                                        BREAK-DOWN OF GDP PER CAPITA
                                                LABOUR PRODUCTIVITY - PRIVATE SECTOR | RATE
                                                OF CHANGE

                                                      5      Apparent labour productivity in the private sector                                                         5.0               Employment rate
                                                             Real wages in the private sector                                                                                             Activity rate
                                                                                                                                                                        4.0               Total factor productivity (a)
                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                          Capital stock
                                                                                                                                  Contributions, in percentage points




                                                                                                                                                                        3.0               GDP per capita (rate of change,%)
                                                      3

                                                                                                                                                                        2.0
                                                      2
                                         Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                        -1.0

                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                        -2.0

                                                  -2                                                                                                                    -3.0

                                                  -3                                                                                                                    -4.0
                                                          99 2000 01    02    03   04   05    06   07    08   09   10   11   12                                                99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12


                                                Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                                      Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                Note: Nominal wages in the private sector are deﬂated basing                                             Note: Total factor productivity is the residual of a growth ac-
                                                on the evolution of prices in private consumption.                                                       counting equation, which is strongly reliant on hypotheses over
                                                                                                                                                         the functional form of the production function considered for
                                                                                                                                                         the economy and on the value of its parameters.
    Chart 4.16                                                                     Chart 4.17
    CAPITAL STOCK | ANNUAL GROWTH RATE                                             BREAK-DOWN OF THE POPULATION (25-64
                                                                                   YEARS) BY SCHOOL ATTAINMENT LEVEL
                                                                                                                                                              4
             10                    Public                                                100
                                   Residencial
                                   Corporations (construction)                                                                                                97
             8                     Corporations (machinery and equipment)




                                                                                                                                                              Supply
                                                                                         80
             6


             4
                                                                                         60




                                                                            Percentage
Percentage




             2

                                                                                         40
             0


             -2
                                                                                         20
             -4


             -6                                                                           0
                  99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10          11   12                       Portugal 1998 OECD 1998              Portugal 2010 OECD 2010

                                                                                                    Below upper secondary
                                                                                                    Upper secondary and post-secondary non-tertiary
                                                                                                    Tertiary education

    Source: Banco de Portugal.                                                     Sources: OECD, Education at a Glance 2012.

The contribution of total factor productivity to per capita output growth was -0.3 p.p. in 2012, following
2.8 p.p. in 2010 and -0.6 p.p. in 2011. This development is related, inter alia, with the typically pro-
-cyclical move in the utilization rate of productive capacity, which saw a strong fall in 2012 (see “Chapter
5 Demand”, of this Report).


The unfavourable pattern of potential output over a prolonged period and the need for
structural reforms

The analysis of the cyclical position of the economy and its trend growth is traditionally made on the
basis of changes in the output gap and potential output growth. These indicators are calculated using
statistical or structural methods, with the ﬁrst requiring the choice of smoothing parameters and the
second requiring a choice of formulations for the production function. However, various methodologies
point to a negative value for the output gap in the Portuguese economy, along with an increase of the
gap compared with 2011. In its turn, the ﬁgure for potential GDP growth in 2012 shows a different
behaviour relatively to 2011, depending on the methodology used. However, all the options converge
towards slightly negative ﬁgures (Chart 4.18).

The existence of slightly negative potential output growth rates ﬁts into the framework of trend slowdown
visible since 1998, reﬂecting above all structural features in the economy, but also the cyclical develop-
ments themselves. In fact, in a scenario of prolonged economic adjustment and structural transforma-
tion, which in the case of Portugal started before the international economic and ﬁnancial crisis, the
statistical and structural methods mentioned above tend to carry over mechanically into the future the
reality of the past few years, and as such, they do not allow for conclusions to be drawn on the future
path of the economy.

However, it is also true that the continuing deterioration of the cyclical position of the economy can
have a real negative impact on potential growth. This risk materialises, for example, in the on-going
reduction in the stock of capital, in the depreciation of the human capital of unemployed workers and
in the emigration of qualiﬁed young men and women. In this context, what is essential is to implement
a wide array of reforms in the labour and product markets, translating into the creation of attractive
conditions for an increase in productive investment. Growth in private investment, speciﬁcally by attrac-
                                          Chart 4.18
                                          POTENTIAL GDP GROWTH
I                                                                                     4.0                        Hodrick-Prescott
                                                                                                                 Baxter-King
                                                                                      3.5                        Christiano-Fitzgerald
98                                                                                                               Cobb-Douglas
                                                                                      3.0                        Constant elasticity of substitution
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                      2.5

                                                                                      2.0

                                                                                      1.5

                                                                         Percentage   1.0

                                                                                      0.5

                                                                                      0.0

                                                                                      -0.5

                                                                                      -1.0

                                                                                      -1.5
                                                                                             99   01   03   05          07        09         11


                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                          Notes: For more details on output gap computation methods see, Almeida, V. and R. Félix (2006), “Computing Potential Output
                                          and the Output Gap for the Portuguese Economy”, Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin Autumn and Valle e Azevedo (2007), “A
                                          Multivariate Band-Pass Filter”, Banco de Portugal, Working Paper 17.




                                         ting foreign direct investment targeting the creation of new productive capacity, and the continuation
                                         of efforts to raise the level of human capital will facilitate the recovery in the potential growth of the
                                         Portuguese economy.


                                         A broad set of structural reforms continued to be put in place

                                         During 2012 a signiﬁcant set of structural reforms continued to be implemented, within the scope of
                                         the economic and ﬁnancial assistance programme. Intervention is taking place in a wide range of areas,
                                         affecting most economic sectors and it has, in many cases, important budgetary implications.

                                         A number of important developments occurred in the labour market. During the year, there were changes
                                         in the Labour Code which were approved and came into force, speciﬁcally in terms of an increase in
                                         working hours, reductions in the pay for overtime and an increase in ﬂexibility regarding the manage-
                                         ment of working hours. These measures were discussed in Banco de Portugal’s 2011 Annual Report. In
                                         addition, new regulations governing the unemployment subsidy came into force in April 2012. In 2013,
                                         there was agreement over the rules governing the amount of severance payments. For new permanent
                                         contracts, this was deﬁned as 12 days per year of service. For existing ﬁxed-term and permanent contracts,
                                         the ﬁgures are 18 days per year of service in the ﬁrst three years and 12 days beyond this period, with
                                         current rights maintained and a maximum of 12 days of compensation.

                                         There were also changes during the year regarding the goods and services markets. Work continued
                                         on incorporating the Services Directive into Portuguese law, although there has been a delay involving
                                         some aspects of it. In addition, the Framework Law for regulators is going through the approval stage.
                                         In January 2013 the Framework Law for professional associations was published, leading to a revision
                                         of various statutes and aiming at the ﬂexibility of those markets. Legislation aiming at the reduction of
                                         licensing requirements in a number of areas is also slated for 2013.

                                         In the energy sector, there is a plan under way to bring electricity production costs down, leading to
                                         the elimination of the tariff deﬁcit by 2020. In spite of the changes introduced in the rates of return
                                         applied to some forms of production, the international authorities have signalled the need to adopt new
measures with a view to limiting increases in costs for consumers. In this context, the granting of CO2
emission licences, whose revenues constitute a very important part of the plan to eliminate the tariff
deﬁcit, corresponds to a tax with economic incidence on producers and consumers but with potentially
positive effects on the environment. There are also on-going efforts to create an Iberian gas market.           4
As for the transport sector, there was a rise in fares in 2012, introduced with a view to balancing operating   99
results in the companies concerned, which was accompanied by a fall in demand. Nevertheless, there




                                                                                                                Supply
are concerns over the levels of debt in these companies as concession contracts are being prepared. A
new law covering port facilities was approved and came into force in February 2013, setting out a 20
per cent reduction in the fees charged by the port authorities. Still in the pipeline is a review of current
concessions. In the air transport sector, 95 per cent of the capital of ANA – Aeroportos de Portugal was
sold by the end of 2012.

In terms of housing, there was a revaluation of real-estate property, which will have an impact on tax
revenue from 2013 onwards. Additionally, in accordance with the new rental law, there was the start
of an update to rents on contracts dating from before 1990, which is likely to be a prolonged process.

The judicial system is vital for markets to run smoothly, ensuring the capacity to resolve conﬂicts quickly
and efﬁciently. Progress was made on this front during 2012, speciﬁcally in terms of cutting the number
of cases pending and reorganising the geographical structure of court jurisdictions. A new civil code was
approved in early 2013 and one of its aims is to reduce the delays in trials by making sure that those
involved are duly made accountable.

The assessment of international authorities regarding the structural reform process in Portugal has been
broadly positive. Nevertheless, the challenges facing reforms of this kind lie crucially in effective imple-
mentation and the need for stability over time.
Box 4.1 | Cost structure and profit margins of Portuguese
firms

The cost structure of a ﬁrm is to a large extent endogenous to the business sector in which it operates                                                                 4
and its distribution across ﬁrms translates the diversity of production technologies, ﬁrm speciﬁc factors
and the share of each sector. Chart 1 reports the distribution of the share of each item in operating                                                                   101
cost, for the overall economy and speciﬁc sectors.1 The calculations are based on annual balance sheet




                                                                                                                                                                        Supply
and income statements of ﬁrms collected under Informação Empresarial Simpliﬁcada (IES). This is an
extremely rich dataset since it virtually covers the universe of non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms.2

Costs with intermediate inputs account for the large majority of operating costs, representing nearly 60
per cent, on average, for Portuguese ﬁrms, followed by labour costs (around 30 per cent). Energy costs
and interest and depreciation account, on average, for the remaining amount, in roughly equal measure.
In sectoral terms, the proportion of intermediate inputs costs is greater in services, which is related with
the nature of trade and restaurants.

The dispersion in the distribution of cost shares per ﬁrm is also relevant (Chart 2). Costs imputed to
energy and interest and depreciation account for under 20 per cent in almost all ﬁrms. In contrast, the
distributions of labour costs and intermediate inputs weight present a very large dispersion across ﬁrms.
The distributions associated with cost structures tend to be more stable over time but may provide some
indications on the degree of ﬂexibility of each input. It is clear that if there is a part of the costs that are
rigid in the short term, this can hinder the ability of ﬁrms to adjust in periods when sales are down, and
consequently reduce their proﬁt margins.




     Chart 1                                                                             Chart 2
     FIRM-LEVEL OPERATIONAL COST STRUCTURE IN                                            FIRM-LEVEL OPERATIONAL COST STRUCTURE IN
     2011                                                                                2011 | PER CENT

                                  Average structure by sectors                                                      Firm-level distribution

           100
                                                                                         18




            90
                         29.6                                                27.4
            80                               34.3          36.1
            70
                                                                                         12




            60
Per cent




            50
                         58.5
            40                                                               60.5
                                             54.5          52.4
                                                                                         6




            30
            20
            10            6.4                6.8           6.7               6.2
                                                                                         0




            0             5.5                4.5           4.8               5.9
                                                                                              0             20            40          60            80            100
                   Overall economy Manufacturing      Construction         Services

                                                                                              Labour                             Intermediate inputs (excl. energy)
                 Labour                             Intermediate inputs (excl. energy)
                 Interest and depreciation          Energy                                    Interest and depreciation          Energy



     Sources: INE, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance and Public                   Sources: INE, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance and Public
     Administration and Banco de Portugal calculations (IES).                            Administration and Banco de Portugal calculations (IES).

1 Operating costs are approximated by the sum of labor costs, intermediate inputs (excluding energy), interest and
  depreciation and energy. Labour costs include wages and other contributions including social security. The costs
  of intermediate inputs include the cost of raw materials and external supplies. Energy costs include electricity,
  gas and water supply costs. In 2010, with the move from the ofﬁcial Portuguese plan of accounts (Plano Oﬁcial
  de Contas – POC) to the system of accounting norms (Sistema de Normalização Contabilística – SNC), there were
  changes to ﬁrm accounts with effects on items as interest. For this reason, no comparisons between 2009 and
  2010 were made.
2 Inactive ﬁrms, associated to nil ﬁgures for turnover, labour costs, interest and depreciation, energy costs or
  intermediate inputs (excluding energy), were excluded from the analysis.
                                         The year-on-year change in the share of energy costs and interest and depreciation on total operating
                                         costs was approximately nil, on average, in 2009 and 2011 for Portuguese ﬁrms (Table 1). This means that
                                         these costs were down in tandem with operating costs. As for the share of intermediate inputs in costs,
 I                                       there was a fall in 2009 and 2011, whereas the share of labour costs was up. This can be interpreted as
                                         evidence of ﬂexibility in the use of intermediate inputs, as against the greater rigidity in the adjustment of
102
                                         labour. In sectoral terms, the increase in labour cost share is, on average, relatively higher in construction.
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         In this sector, a quarter of the ﬁrms registered increases of more than 7 p.p. in 2009 and 2011. However,
                                         aggregate information for the economy as a whole points to a signiﬁcant adjustment in labour in 2012.

                                         Part of operating costs exhibits short-term rigidity, and this plays a part in a pro-cyclical behaviour of
                                         proﬁt margins. The developments in operating proﬁt margins for Portuguese ﬁrms’ are relevant in the
                                         context of an ongoing adjustment process. In fact, the difﬁculty in adjusting costs and the squeezing of
                                         proﬁt margins has likely contributed to the exit of ﬁrms from the market and job destruction.

                                         As a result of the dynamics recorded in sales and operating costs, the average proﬁt margin, for ﬁrms
                                         in the Portuguese economy, stood at -15.4 per cent in 2011, even though, more than half of the ﬁrms
                                         came in with positive proﬁt margins.3 The proﬁt margin distribution moved to the left between 2009
                                         and 2011, with an average change of -5.2 p.p. (Table 2). Even so, more than a quarter of ﬁrms came in
                                         with variations in proﬁt margins of more than 3 p.p.. In sectoral terms, the reduction in proﬁt margins
                                         is clearly more relevant in construction (-12.3 in 2009 on average and -17.4 p.p. 2011). It should be
                                         mentioned, however, that in 2009, the median ﬁrm in the construction sector registered a proﬁt margin
                                         higher than the economy as a whole.

                                         If the Portuguese economy’s adjustment process is to succeed, more productive and innovative ﬁrms need
                                         to be set up and expand. In addition, increases in their proﬁt margins need to be based on efﬁciency
                                         gains, an increase in product quality or innovation and not the reﬂection of market structures that are
                                         not truly competitive. Various factors must come together for this transformation to occur, potentially in
                                         a context of foreign investment. The ability of ﬁrms to adjust their cost structure is one of these factors.




                                          Table 1
                                          CHANGE OF THE SHARE IN OPERATING COSTS | PERCENTAGE POINTS
                                                                       Overall economy                 Manufacturing                      Construction                     Services
                                                                  Ave- Me-                         Ave- Me-                       Ave- Me-                        Ave- Me-
                                                             Year                   Q1      Q3                     Q1      Q3                      Q1      Q3                     Q1      Q3
                                                                  rage dian                        rage dian                      rage dian                       rage dian
                                                             2009   1.61    1.18    -1.59   4.86   1.92    1.71    -1.38   5.34   2.36     2.00    -3.18   7.98   1.39    1.02    -1.43   4.26
                                          Labour
                                                             2011   0.82    0.56    -2.38   4.08   0.38    0.19    -2.78   3.64   1.21     1.08    -4.44   7.07   0.85    0.59    -2.03   3.78

                                          Intermediate       2009   -1.03   -0.70   -4.87   3.00   -1.70   -1.40   -5.69   2.39   -2.13    -1.62   -9.19   5.19   -0.67   -0.50   -4.07   2.85
                                          inputs (excl.
                                          energy)            2011   -1.38   -1.00   -5.20   2.53   -0.77   -0.54   -4.61   3.12   -2.08    -1.77   -8.96   4.94   -1.39   -1.02   -4.82   2.11

                                                             2009   -0.14   -0.04   -1.33   0.98   -0.11   -0.04   -1.40   1.12   0.31     0.00    -1.59   1.75   -0.23   -0.05   -1.27   0.81
                                          Interest and
                                          depreciation       2011   0.07    0.00    -0.94   1.04   -0.01   0.00    -1.07   1.04   0.32     0.00    -1.24   1.52   0.04    0.00    -0.86   0.96

                                                             2009   -0.14   -0.04   -1.33   0.98   -0.12   -0.08   -0.65   0.39   -0.54    -0.30   -1.26   0.37   -0.49   -0.07   -0.74   0.34
                                          Energy
                                                             2011   0.07    0.00    -0.94   1.04   0.40    0.23    -0.22   0.89   0.54     0.35    -0.39   1.34   0.50    0.19    -0.20   0.91

                                          Sources: INE, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance and Public Administration and Banco de Portugal calculations (IES).
                                          Note: Q1 and Q3 correspond to the 25th and 75th percentile, respectively.



                                         3 The proﬁt margin was computed as the ratio between turnover deducted from operational costs to turnover.
Table 2
FIRM-LEVEL DISTRIBUTION OF PROFIT-MARGINS | LEVEL AND CHANGE

                                                   Proﬁt margin (per cent)
                                                                                          Change in proﬁt margin (percentual       4
                                                                                                       points)
                                Year     Average     Median         Q1         Q3       Average     Median        Q1         Q3
                                                                                                                                   103
                                2009       -12.8         0.9      -11.9         6.2        -1.9       -0.1        -7.7       6.0
Overall economy




                                                                                                                                   Supply
                                2011       -15.4         0.2      -15.2         4.9        -5.2       -1.4       -10.3       3.8

                                2009       -10.3         0.9      -11.0         6.1        -6.3       -0.7        -9.1       5.1
Manufacturing
                                2011       -11.3         0.3      -12.5         5.2        -7.7       -2.1       -10.5       3.3

                                2009       -12.8         2.2      -12.1        10.3       -12.3       -1.3       -15.1       7.7
Construction
                                2011       -16.9         0.8      -17.4         7.0       -17.4       -3.8       -20.3       4.2

                                2009       -13.3         0.8      -12.1         5.6        -6.6       -0.2        -7.3       4.5
Services
                               2011        -16.0         0.0      -15.5         4.6        -9.2       -1.4        -9.9       2.9

Sources: INE, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance and Public Administration and Banco de Portugal calculations (IES).
Notes: Q1 and Q3 correspond to the 25th and 75th percentile, respectively.
5. DEMAND                                                                                                  5

The year saw a 3.2 per cent decline in economic activity, following a 1.6 per cent fall in 2011 (Table     105
5.1). Contraction for the second consecutive year reﬂected, among other things, an immediate impact




                                                                                                           Demand
on aggregate demand of a number of adjustment measures, in an economic framework marked by a
depressed international climate, high levels of indebtedness and tight conditions for ﬁnancing. Adjust-
ment measures connected with the Economic and Financial Assistance Program, in spite of their recessive
impact in the short term, are essential for restoring macro-economic equilibriums, including sustainable
conditions for external indebtedness, and thus conditions for market funding, since this is crucial for
sustained growth in output, income and demand.


Continuing adjustment of macro-economic imbalances

During the year, domestic demand stalled across the board, leaving no component immune. Just as in
2011, exports remained the only component of aggregate demand that saw an increase, although at
a pace that steadily lost momentum over the year, in tandem with the country’s main trading partners,
most emphatically in the euro area. The contraction of domestic demand was more intense than in the
previous year, and with exports slowing, there was a steeper decline in imports than in the year before.

The decline in economic activity was clearly more pronounced in Portugal than in the euro area, causing
a widening to more than 8 per cent of the negative differential that had accumulated since the beginning
of the economic and monetary union in 1999 (Chart 5.1). This decade-long divergence of the Portuguese
economy seems to have brought to the surface an array of structural weaknesses that took its toll on
potential output growth and, in the existing ﬁnancial and institutional framework, materialized in the
long drawn-out accumulation of macro-economic imbalances


A massive contraction in private consumption and an increase of the savings rate, in
a context characterized by a lowering of permanent income prospects and increased
uncertainty.

Private consumption saw a 5.6 per cent contraction over the year (after a decline of 3.8 per cent in
2011), as households adjusted their levels of expenditure and indebtedness (Table 5.2). Contraction of

 Table 5.1
 GDP AND MAIN EXPENDITURE COMPONENTS | REAL GROWTH RATE, IN PERCENTAGE
                                         share of GDP       2008   2009    2010     2011        2012
                                          in 2012 (%)
 GDP                                          100            0.0    -2.9    1.9     -1.6        -3.2
 Domestic demand                              101            0.8    -3.3    1.8     -5.8        -6.8
  Private consumption                          66            1.3    -2.3    2.5     -3.8        -5.6
  Government consumption                       18            0.3    4.7     0.1     -4.3        -4.4
  Investment                                   16           -0.1   -13.3    1.4    -13.8       -13.7
    GFCF                                       16           -0.3    -8.6   -3.1    -10.7       -14.5
    Stockbuilding(a)                                         0.0    -1.1    0.9     -0.7         0.2
  Exports                                      39           -0.1   -10.9   10.2      7.2         3.3
  Imports                                      39            2.3   -10.0    8.0     -5.9        -6.9

                               (a)
 Domestic demand contribution                                0.9    -3.6    2.0     -6.3        -7.0
 Net exports contribution(a)                                -1.0    0.6    -0.1      4.7         3.9
 Source: INE.
 Note: (a) Contribute to real GDP growth, in percentage points.
                                                   Table 5.2
                                                   PRIVATE CONSUMPTION AND ITS MAIN COMPONENTS | REAL GROWTH RATE, IN PERCENTAGE
 I                                                                                                              share in 2012        2008                           2009              2010               2011           2012
                                                                                                                     (%)
                                                   Private consumption                                              100              1.3                            -2.3                2.5               -3.8           -5.6
106
                                                          Current consumption                                        93              1.4                            -0.6                1.3               -2.1           -4.0
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                               Foodstuff                                             20              1.1                                0.8             1.2                0.0           -0.4
                                                               Non-food                                              73              1.5                            -0.9                1.3               -2.7           -4.9
                                                          Consumer durables                                               7          0.7                           -16.9              14.5              -18.5           -23.0
                                                               Vehicles                                                   3          -1.0                          -26.5              28.1              -24.9           -35.2
                                                               Other consumer durables                                    4          2.4                            -7.7                4.1             -12.4           -13.2

                                                   Memo items:
                                                          Real disposable income                                                     1.4                                1.8             1.7               -4.9           -2.9
                                                          Households' saving rate                                                    7.1                            10.9              10.1                 9.1          11.6
                                                   Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                                   Note: (a) Deﬂated by the private consumption deﬂator.

                                         private consumption was associated with a big fall in households’ disposable income, with a marked
                                         deterioration of labour market conditions, with the prevalence of tight conditions for ﬁnancing, and to
                                         a high level of uncertainty over the nature of additional measures to be undertaken and the degree of
                                         budgetary imbalance adjustment.

                                         As mentioned above, the reduction in Portuguese households’ level of consumption in 2011 and 2012 is
                                         one aspect of the adjustment of domestic demand to levels that are compatible with output and with the
                                         income of resident operators. Portugal had in fact seen an accumulation of a positive growth differential
                                         in private consumption against the euro area from 1999, reaching more than 10 per cent in 2010 (Chart
                                         5.2), contrasting with a negative differential of close to 3 per cent of the accumulated GDP over the
                                         same period (Chart 5.1). But in 2011 and in 2012, the economy stalled and the momentum was lost.

                                         The fall in private consumption in 2012 was across the board, with the durable goods component parti-
                                         cularly hard hit (Table 5.2 and Chart 5.3). The adjustment of expenditure on durable consumer goods
                                         in the recent past was higher than usual in previous recessionary periods. This came about to a large
                                         extent because households needed to adapt their stock of this type of goods to their permanent income
                                         prospects and to reassess their levels of indebtedness as the Portuguese economy adjusted. Current



                                                   Chart 5.1                                                                                          Chart 5.2
                                                   GDP GROWTH IN PORTUGAL AND IN THE EURO                                                             PRIVATE CONSUMPTION GROWTH IN PORTUGAL
                                                   AREA | REAL GROWTH RATE                                                                            AND IN THE EURO AREA | REAL GROWTH RATE
                                                          6                                                                                                 14

                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                             8

                                                          0                                                                                                  6
                                         In percentage




                                                                                                                                            In percentage




                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                          -2
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                          -4                                                                                                 0

                                                          -6                                                                                                -2

                                                                      Cummulative differential since 1999 (in %)                                            -4      Cummulative differential since 1999 (in %)
                                                          -8          Differential (em p.p.)                                                                        Differential (em p.p.)
                                                                      Portugal                                                                              -6      Portugal
                                                                      Euro area                                                                                     Euro area
                                                         -10                                                                                                -8
                                                               1999       2001      2003       2005      2007      2009       2011                               1999         2001   2003     2005      2007     2009    2011


                                                   Sources: Eurostat and INE.                                                                         Sources: Eurostat and INE.
consumer expenditure recorded a moderate decline after a growth that was higher than that of the
disposable income in the period prior to the outbreak of the ﬁnancial crisis. This move was also associated
with a reassessment of permanent income prospects, with the increase of liquidity constraints and with
a steep decline in consumer conﬁdence (Chart 5.4). The decline in current consumption involves mostly                                                               5
the non-food component, with the food component having remained virtually static since 2010. This
                                                                                                                                                                    107
stemmed from the fact expenditure on essential goods has a lower income elasticity.




                                                                                                                                                                    Demand
The household savings rate was up for the second consecutive year, as real disposable income declined
sharply. This pattern shows that the current recessive period has a distinctive nature in terms of consumer
behaviour. The perception that the adjustment of the level of income was permanent, as well as the
increase in liquidity constraints and in risk aversion, led to changes in consumer behaviour that materia-
lized in a big increase in the savings rate. In addition, this increase in the savings rate seem also to have
come about because of a sizeable decline in income components that are subject to a lower propensity
to consume, in contrast to the rise in disposable income components subject to a lower propensity to
consume (see “Box 5.1 The increase in the savings rate in 2012: an explanation based on micro and
macro-economic evidence”, in this Report).

A crucial point here concerns the nature of the decline in total disposable income during the year, largely
determined by the decline in labour income (Table 5.3). This reﬂects the decision to suspend payment of
holiday and Christmas bonuses and the shedding of personnel in the public sector. In tandem, the private
sector saw a decline in employment combined with wage moderation. In the public sector, a signiﬁcant
part of the decrease in employment translates directly into an increase in the number of pensioners.
Despite this increase, and greater expenditure on unemployment beneﬁts, domestic transfers were well
down, as the payment of holiday and Christmas bonuses to pensioners was also suspended. In the
opposite direction, the year saw a signiﬁcant increase in corporate and property income and in external
transfers. The increase in corporate and property income beneﬁted from the increase in net interest
income earned by households, which was positively affected by bank deposits created in the past with
long maturities and high interest rates.




         Chart 5.3                                                                     Chart 5.4
         PRIVATE CONSUMPTION EVOLUTION BY TYPE                                         CONSUMER CONFIDENCE | BALANCE OF RESPONDENTS,
         OF GOOD | CUMULATIVE GROWTH SINCE 2008                                        3 - MONTHS AVERAGE

                40                                                                     0                                                                     8.0
                                                                                      -10                                                                    6.0
                30
                                                                                      -20                                                                    4.0
                20                                                                    -30
                                                                                                                                                             2.0
                10                                                                    -40
                                                                                                                                                             0.0
In percentage




                                                                                      -50
                 0                                                                                                                                           -2.0
                                                                                      -60
                                                                                      -70                                                                    -4.0
                -10
                                                                                      -80                                                                    -6.0
                -20
                                                                                      -90                                                                    -8.0
                                                                                            1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
                -30
                             Current - foodstuff                                             2008           2009          2010           2011        2012
                             Current - non food                                                     Consumer confidence indicator
                -40          Durables                                                               Financial situation over the next 12 months
                             Real disposable income (a)                                             General economic situation over the next 12 months
                -50                                                                                 Unemployment expectations over the next 12 months
                                                                                                    Savings over the next 12 months
                      1998     2000     2002      2004    2006   2008   2010   2012                 Private consumption, real growth rate in % (rhs scale)


         Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.                              Sources: European Commission and INE.
         Note: (a) Deﬂated by the private consumption deﬂator.
                                          Table 5.3
                                          PERSONAL DISPOSABLE INCOME | NOMINAL GROWTH RATE, IN PERCENTAGE
 I                                                                            share in 2012   2008    2009        2010        2011        2012
                                                                                   (%)
                                          Disposable income(a)                    100         4.0      -0.4        3.0         -1.3        -0.9
108
                                          Compensation of employees                68         3.4      0.1         1.1         -1.6        -7.2
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                          Domestic transfers                       30         7.5      7.0         3.3         -1.9        -3.0
                                          External transfers                        2         2.1     -20.6        8.6         3.8        20.6
                                          Corporate and property income            30         4.7      -6.3        3.9         3.4         7.5
                                          Direct taxes (-)                          9         3.6      0.7         -0.6       10.0         -6.6
                                          Social security contributions (-)        21         5.8      0.1         0.5         -0.7        -7.7
                                          Source: INE.

                                         The decline in public consumption within the budgetary consolidation process

                                         Public sector consumption was down by 4.4 per cent (following a 4.3 per cent fall in 2011). This stems
                                         from the reduction in the number of employees and less expenditure on goods and services of general
                                         government within the budgetary consolidation process.

                                         The reduction in staff in general government has a direct negative impact on payroll costs and, conse-
                                         quently, on household labour income. However, the net impact on public expenditure, as well as on
                                         households’ disposable income, must take into consideration that a considerable part of the decline in
                                         payroll numbers was a result of retirement, thus contributing to the increase in the number of pensioners.

                                         The reduction in expenditure on goods and services reﬂects the fall in the amount of intermediate
                                         consumption of general government and in social beneﬁts in kind for households. The decrease in
                                         intermediate consumption led to a decline in the demand of general government for goods and services
                                         produced in the private sector, thereby affecting production and employment. For its part, the decline in
                                         the amount of social beneﬁts in kind does not directly affect disposable income since this only involves
                                         cash beneﬁts. However, the decline implies that the families that continue to use the goods and services
                                         that are no longer provided by the public sector are using their own resources to meet expenditure.


                                         Investment fell in a climate clouded by uncertainty and darkened by a worsening outlook for
                                         demand

                                         Investment was down 13.7 per cent over the year, after a decline of 13.8 the year before. This involved a
                                         contraction in gross ﬁxed capital formation (GFCF) of 14.5 per cent in 2012, accompanied by a contribution
                                         of 1.1 percentage points (pp.) from the stockbuilding to the annual rate of change in investment. The
                                         volume of inventories in fact recorded only a marginal decline in 2012, compared with the substantial
                                         destocking in the previous year..

                                         The reduction in GFCF affected all institutional sectors (Table 5.4). Residential investment continued to
                                         decline, recording a volume similar to what was recorded in the beginning of the 90s, after a decade
                                         of consecutive falls. This move in residential investment in property has seen a notable increase in the
                                         90s, but there was now a gradual stabilization of the housing stock at a new level, after the increase in
                                         the period following ﬁnancial liberalization and nominal convergence. The reassessment of households’
                                         prospects of permanent income was a major force conditioning this form of investment as was the
                                         worsening of conditions in the labour market, the increase of uncertainties regarding the levels of future
                                         income and the tight conditions for ﬁnancing.

                                         Corporate GFCF also recorded a sharp decline during the year, falling more than in the years before. This
                                         reduction was marked by a major contraction in demand on the domestic market and by stagnation
                                         of external demand with repercussions on the export prospects of Portuguese ﬁrms. The prospects for
                                         demand worsened in the domestic and external market, meshing with the need to reduce the levels of
 Table 5.4
 INVESTMENT | REAL GROWTH RATE, IN PERCENTAGE
                                                share in 2012      2008              2009                 2010             2011              2012         5
                                                     (%)
 Investment                                          100            -0.1            -13.3                      1.4        -13.8              -13.7
     Gross ﬁxed capital formation                     99            -0.3             -8.6                  -3.1           -10.7              -14.5
                                                                                                                                                          109
      by institutional sector




                                                                                                                                                          Demand
         Public                                       12            6.0                1.7                25.3            -32.0              -30.8
         Private                                      87            -1.2            -10.1                  -7.9            -5.9              -11.9
         Residential                                  19           -11.7            -15.4                -11.0             -6.8              -10.9
         Corporate                                    68            2.3              -8.6                  -7.0            -5.6              -12.1
      by type of good
         Machinery and equipment                      25           11.2              -9.9                  -1.0            -7.5               -6.7
         Tranport equipment                            5            -3.8            -21.8                  -7.9           -24.5              -24.9
         Construction                                 59            -4.6             -6.6                  -4.2           -11.4              -18.1
         Other                                         9            2.9              -2.6                      2.9         -2.6               -7.8
      Stockbuilding(a)                                              0.2              -4.7                      4.5         -3.3               1.1
 Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
 Note: (a) Contribute to real investment growth, in percentage points.


Portuguese companies’ indebtedness and the increased uncertainty. These factors led to the corporate
sector postponing investment decisions, particularly taking into account the low levels in the use of
productive capacity (Chart 5.5). In addition, restrictive ﬁnancing conditions were still the order of the
day, both at the level of ﬁnancing costs and of the criteria used by banks for credit approval and have,
albeit to a much lesser degree, continued to hamper companies’ investment decisions (see Chart 5.6 and
“Section 2.2 Monetary and ﬁnancial conditions of the Portuguese economy”, in this Report).

In 2012, public investment again recorded a very pronounced fall, fenced in by the need to reduce public
expenditure. Contraction of public investment essentially reﬂects the decline in the GFCF of a number of
ﬁrms included in the consolidation perimeter of the public administration. It should be mentioned that it
is essential for the reduction of investment expenses by the public administration to be in line with the
rationalization plan for the public sector, and thus ensuring that a number of infrastructures essential to
the development of economic activity continue to operate in an efﬁcient manner.

 Chart 5.5                                                                 Chart 5.6
 CAPACITY UTILIZATION RATE IN                                              MAIN FACTOR LIMITING INVESTMENT | AS A
 MANUFACTURING SECTOR | AS A PERCENTAGE OF                                 PERCENTAGE OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF ENTERPRISES WITH
 INSTALLED CAPACITY                                                        INVESTMENT RESTRICTIONS

90                                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                     Other                                    2011
                                                                                                                                              2010

85
                                                                                       Productive capacity


80                                                                                           Interest rates


                                                                                       Bank credit access
75
                   Average 1990-2012 = 79.1
                                                                                      Self-financing ability
70

                                                                                    Investment profitability

65
                                                                           Deterioration of sales prospects

60                                                                                                         -10       10        30       50           70
  1990     1993    1996     1999    2002      2005   2008   2011                                                          In percentage


 Source: European Commission.                                              Source: INE (Investment Survey).
                                                                           Note: The results shown for each year are based on the Invest-
                                                                           ment Survey published in July.
                                         The reduction of GFCF in 2012 is shaped by a very marked fall in investment in construction, which reﬂects
                                         the steep downward path of both residential and public investment and of the corporate component as
                                         well, since the low level of use of the companies’ productive capacity has not functioned as a catalyst
 I                                       to the construction of new production units. In addition, the reduction of corporate GFCF has had a
                                         knock-on effect in the form of a marked reduction of investment in transport equipment and, to a lesser
110
                                         degree, to a decline in investment in machinery and other equipment. This implies that the cut-back in
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         this component of corporate capital stock will continue (see “Chapter 4 Supply”, in this Report).

                                         The contribution of the stockbuiding in the way that investment moved in 2012 was 1.1 pp. (contrasting
                                         with the negative contribution of 3.3 pp. in 2011). This contribution indicates a marginal destocking in
                                         2012, after the decline in stocks in the previous year, against a background in which the level of economic
                                         activity declined much more than in 2011 (Chart 5.7). The intra-annual proﬁle of stockbuilding during
                                         the year points to a considerable destocking in the ﬁrst half of the year, which was almost entirely offset
                                         by an accumulation of stocks, particularly in the fourth quarter. This move in the last quarter of the year
                                         seems to have reﬂected, among other factors, a big reduction in demand, the extent of which may not
                                         have been anticipated by economic agents. Additionally, the possible impact of speciﬁc factors may have
                                         contributed to this pattern, among them the dockworkers’ strike.


                                         Exports show a remarkable dynamism as the external environment deteriorates

                                         With global economic activity worsening, namely in the main Portuguese trade partners (see “Chapter 1
                                         International Context”, of this Report), the exports of goods and services decelerated sharply. In particular,
                                         after a 7.2 growth in 2011, exports came in with a 3.3 per cent growth, once again above the growth
                                         for the euro area. Despite the marked slowdown, the performance of the Portuguese exports is based
                                         on a signiﬁcant gain in market share of close to 3.5 per cent, similar to the previous year (Chart 5.8).
                                         It should be noted that the accumulated market share that Portugal has gained in the last two years is
                                         one of the highest among the euro area countries (Chart 5.9). This remarkable performance shows that

                                                    Chart 5.7                                                                     Chart 5.8
                                                    INVENTORIES AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY | ANNUAL                                    MARKET SHARE EVOLUTION OF THE
                                                    GROWTH RATE                                                                   PORTUGUESE EXPORTS OF GOODS AND
                                                                                                                                  SERVICES | REAL RATE OF CHANGE

                                                         5                                                            20                Accumulated change in the market share (quarter-on-quarter, 1998 Q4 = 0)
                                                                                                                                        External demand (year-on-year growth rate)
                                                                                                                                        Portuguese exports (year-on-year growth rate)
                                                         4                                                                             16
                                                                                                                      15
                                                         3                                                                             12

                                                                                                                                        8
                                                         2                                                            10
                                                                                                                                        4
                                         In percentage




                                                         1
                                                                                                                            Per cent




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                      5
                                                         0                                                                             -4

                                                         -1                                                           0                -8

                                                                                                                                   -12
                                                         -2
                                                                                                                      -5           -16
                                                         -3
                                                                                                                                   -20
                                                                            GDP      Inventories (rhs scale)
                                                         -4                                                           -10          -24
                                                              1999   2001   2003   2005    2007       2009     2011                  1999Q1 2001Q1 2003Q1 2005Q1 2007Q1 2009Q1 2011Q1


                                                    Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.                              Sources: ECB, INE, UK Ofﬁce for National Statistics and Banco
                                                    Note: The time-series “Inventories” was estimated using per-                  de Portugal calculations.
                                                    manent inventory approach. It was assumed that inventories                    Note: The external demand was corrected for the impact of the
                                                    were at around 60 per cent of GDP in 1953 (a level of inven-                  tax fraud in the United Kingdom.
                                                    tories equivalent to 7 month of output). Using this initial level,
                                                    inventories were estimated by accumulating stockbuilding data
                                                    based on the Banco de Portugal Historical Series for the pe-
                                                    riod 1953-1995 and on National Account ﬁgures from 1995
                                                    onwards.
Portuguese companies have the capacity to adjust their market strategies, through an increased effort
to refocus their operations on external markets, given the substantial contraction in domestic demand
perceived by economic agents as long-lasting. The on-going decrease of relative unit labour costs has
helped to bolster the competitive price of the country’s exports. This shift has already reversed the real                                                                                                                                               5
accumulated appreciation of unit labour costs visible since the country joined the euro area (Chart 5.10).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         111
Despite the deceleration of exports, affecting both goods and services (Chart 5.11), the export of goods




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Demand
shows a greater resilience in a less favourable international economic context. In particular the exports
of goods recorded a growth in volume of 4.3 per cent, as compared with an average growth of 3.7
per cent since joining the euro area. The rise in export of services stands at 0.8 per cent, a substantially
smaller variation than what has been noted on average since 1999 (4.6 per cent). The pattern for export
of services has reﬂected the decline in exports of other services, since tourism, despite losing some
momentum, still show a relatively high increase.

In intra-annual terms, the acceleration at the beginning of the year, gave a real year-on-year growth of
the export of goods and services above 8 per cent in the ﬁrst quarter, but this then slackened, with a
decline of 0.5 per cent in the last quarter of the year (Chart 5.8). The occurrence of several periods of
dockworkers’ strikes in some of the main national ports between September and the end of the year
affected the evolution of exports, above all to extra-community countries, since these are, to a large
extent, carried by sea (around 80 per cent).

The nominal growth in the export of goods during 2012 was 5.8 per cent, after an increase of 15.0 per
cent in the year before. Excluding fuels, the ﬁgures are 4.8 and 14.3 per cent, respectively (Table 5.5).
This slowdown was inﬂuenced by the considerable deceleration of the Portuguese export deﬂator, after a
strong growth in 2011, which was more pronounced than in the majority of euro area countries. Under-
lying the momentum of exports is the process of geographical diversiﬁcation seen in recent years (Chart
5.12). Intra-community exports, on the one hand, saw a sharp slowdown (from 13.5 to 1.0 per cent)
with economic activity in the euro area worsening (Chart 5.13). The pattern was particularly noticeable
in exports to Spain across almost all types of goods, and to Germany, mainly reﬂecting the evolution of
exports of vehicles and other transport material.1 It should be highlighted that despite Spain continuing



 Chart 5.9                                                                                                                                                                                    Chart 5.10
 CHANGE IN THE EXPORTS MARKET SHARE FOR                                                                                                                                                       RELATIVE UNIT LABOUR COSTS | WHOLE ECONOMY
 THE EURO AREA COUNTRIES | IN REAL TERMS
20.0                                                                                                                                                            2012                                        Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                2011                                        Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                                    135     Spain
15.0                                                                                                                                                                                                        France
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                    125     Ireland
10.0                                                                                                                                                                                                        Italy

                                                                                                                                                                                                    115
                                                                                                                                                                                    1999 Q1 = 100




 5.0


 0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                105


 -5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                95


-10.0                                                                                                                                                                                                85
                                                                                                                                           Luxembourg
                  Slovakia
        Estonia




                                                                                                        Netherlands
                                                                             France


                                                                                              Austria




                                                                                                                                                        Malta
                             Portugal




                                                          Cyprus




                                                                                                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                                                                                                           Greece
                                                                   Ireland


                                                                                      Italy
                                        Spain




                                                                                                                      Slovenia
                                                Germany




                                                                                                                                 Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                                     75
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1999Q1 2001Q1 2003Q1 2005Q1 2007Q1 2009Q1 2011Q1


 Sources: ECB, INE, UK Ofﬁce for National Statistics, Eurostat                                                                                                                                      Sources: ECB and Banco de Portugal calculations.
 and Banco de Portugal calculations.



1 In the period before October 2011, the export of passenger cars to China occurred indirectly via Germany.
                                                      Chart 5.11                                                         Chart 5.12
                                                      BREAKDOWN OF THE RATE OF CHANGE                                    GEOGRAPHICAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GOODS
                                                      OF EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES |                                 EXPORTS | HERFINDAL-HIRSCHMAN INDEX
 I                                                    CONTRIBUTION TO THE REAL RATE OF CHANGE

                                                         15                                                             0.24
112
                                                                                                                        0.23
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                         10
                                                                                                                        0.22

                                                             5                                                          0.21
                                         Percentage points




                                                                                                                        0.20
                                                             0
                                                                                                                        0.19

                                                             -5                                                         0.18

                                                                                                                        0.17
                                                                     Goods
                                                    -10              Tourism
                                                                     Other services                                     0.16
                                                                     Exports, per cent
                                                    -15                                                                 0.15
                                                                  1999    2001       2003   2005   2007   2009   2011      Jan-05 Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12


                                                      Source: INE.                                                       Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                                                                                                         Note: The Herﬁndal-Hirschman index is a concentration index
                                                                                                                         where a reduction corresponds to a lower concentration. The
                                                                                                                         index is normalized to the interval [0,1]. For more details see
                                                                                                                         ”Box 1.1 The geographical diversiﬁcation of merchandise ex-
                                                                                                                         ports”, Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin – Summer 2012.



                                         to be the main destination of Portuguese exports, this country’s importance has decreased drastically in
                                         recent times (from 27 per cent in 2010 to 22.5 per cent in 2012). Export of goods to extra-community
                                         markets, on the contrary, maintained the high rate of growth that it has shown in recent years, with a
                                         variation of 19.8 per cent in 2012. This has been translated into a signiﬁcant increase of its weight in
                                         Portuguese exports (reaching close to 29 per cent in 2012 compared to less than 25 per cent in 2010).
                                         Exports to the Portuguese-speaking African countries deserve particular mention, with special refe-
                                         rence to Angola, involving medium-to-high technology. Exports to the United States have accelerated,
                                         reﬂecting to a large extent fuel exports. The growth of fuel exports can only partially be explained by
                                         the changes of prices in international markets (see “Chapter 6 Prices”, of this Report). Furthermore,
                                         exports to China are recording substantial increases since the end of 2011, in particular for vehicles and
                                         other transport material. It should be mentioned that the growth in nominal exports of goods has at its
                                         basis signiﬁcant gains in market share, both in 2011 and in 2012, when taking into consideration the
                                         geographical specialization of Portuguese exports. However, the effect of relative specialization in terms
                                         of the geographical distribution of exports has been unfavourable more recently. This fact has been
                                         compounded by a product composition effect which is also negative, the result being a loss of share for
                                         Portuguese exports in world trade in 2012 (see “Box 5.2 Market share of Portuguese exports in 2012:
                                         an analysis based on a sample of export markets”, in this Report).

                                         In terms of technology, the slowdown in the export of goods during the year was fairly general, although
                                         it was particularly marked in the case of high and medium-high technology. As far as high technology is
                                         concerned, it reﬂects the big loss in momentum in exports of pharmaceutical products and an adverse
                                         move in exports of machines and mechanical appliances, speciﬁcally audiovisual. The pronounced decele-
                                         ration in medium-high technology was to a large extent associated with the downward shift in the export
                                         of vehicles. In exports of medium-low technology, despite some slowdown, this component showed
                                         the greatest dynamism, supported to a large degree by fuels. As far as low technology is concerned,
                                         the lack of thrust was particularly visible in the so called traditional sectors, such as textiles, clothing,
                                         footwear, and paper and pulp.
Table 5.5
NOMINAL EXPORTS OF GOODS BY GROUPS OF PRODUCTS, BY TECHNOLOGY INTENSITY AND
DESTINATION COUNTRY | RATE OF CHANGE
                                                                                                                                       5
                                                   Weights Weights             Year-on-year growth rate (per cent)
                                                    2011    2012      2010     2011     2012                     2012
                                                                                                                                       113
                                                                                                   1st     2nd          3rd    4th




                                                                                                                                       Demand
                                                                                                 quarter quarter quarter quarter
Total                                                100.0   100.0     17.6     15.0      5.8      11.5     6.5          4.4    1.1

Total excluding fuels                                 93.3     91.9    15.1     14.3      4.8       8.1     5.5          3.1    2.4

By group of products
  Agriculture                                          5.4      5.4    18.4     13.0      6.0       9.1     5.2          9.6    1.3
  Food                                                 5.2      5.2      3.8    13.1      6.8       9.8     3.6          3.8    9.9
  Mineral fuels                                        7.2      8.5    54.7     29.4     24.9      86.0    20.8         27.0    -9.0
  Chemicals                                            5.7      5.7    21.7     27.1      5.7      -7.1    12.9         11.1    6.8
  Plastics, rubber products                            6.8      6.8    27.0     15.9      6.3       9.7     2.2          8.0    5.6
  Leather, leather products                            0.4      0.4    38.8     24.1     11.6      24.9    11.0         -2.4   14.3
  Wood, cork                                           3.3      3.2    10.2     10.0      2.3       5.3     0.7         -0.6    3.8
  Pulp, paper                                          5.1      4.9    36.9       6.4     2.0      -1.0     3.5         -0.5    6.2
  Textile products                                     4.0      3.7    14.7     10.5      -2.7     -2.4    -6.4         -4.4    2.6
  Clothing                                             5.7      5.4      6.7      6.4     0.9       3.9    -1.8         -0.8    2.3
  Footwear                                             3.7      3.6      9.9    12.9      4.1       0.8     2.7         -0.7   17.9
  Minerals, ores                                       5.1      4.9    14.7       5.5     1.8       5.0    10.3          1.2    -9.0
  Basic metals                                         8.0      8.2    21.3     13.8      8.5       6.2     7.0         10.1   11.2
  Machinery, equipment                                14.6     15.1      8.7    11.4      9.5      14.6    10.2          7.4    6.0
  Motor vehicles, other transport equipment           13.0     11.7    22.0     22.4      -4.8      8.5     1.4     -14.6      -15.4
  Optical and precision instruments                    1.1      1.2    14.8     13.2     16.7      17.6    23.3         22.6    5.8
  Other products                                       5.9      6.1      8.9    20.6      9.1      23.4    11.1          6.7    -2.3

By technology intensity(a)
  High technology                                      7.3      6.8    12.2     15.8      -2.2      4.3     5.4         -6.8   -10.0
  Medium-high technology                              29.3     29.0    20.8     18.2      4.6       8.2     6.6          3.4    0.1
  Medium-low technology                               23.8     26.2    21.7     20.3     16.4      34.7    17.0         15.0    2.0
  Low technology                                      33.2     32.6    14.1     14.1      3.8       5.3     2.7          1.1    6.0
  Residual                                             6.3      5.5    15.6      -8.3     -8.6     -9.2   -13.1         -1.0   -10.4

By destination country
  Intra-community                                     74.4     71.1    17.6     13.5      1.0       5.0     2.2         -0.9    -2.4
    of which:
        Spain                                         24.9     22.5    16.7       6.1     -4.5     -3.2    -5.7         -4.8    -4.3
        Germany                                       13.6     12.3    18.1     19.8      -4.1      4.2    -1.9     -10.7       -8.2
        France                                        12.2     11.8    13.8     16.5      2.8       8.6     0.4          2.3    -0.2
        United Kingdom                                 5.2      5.3    14.0       9.6     7.0      11.8     9.8         -1.5    7.9
        Italy                                          3.7      3.7    16.1     13.7      7.4       4.0    -0.8          2.1   27.2
  Extra-community                                     25.6     28.9    17.4     19.6     19.8      33.6    19.7         19.0   10.0
    of which:
        PALOP                                          6.8      8.0     -9.4    21.2     24.3      30.1    31.5         25.4   14.6
        United States of America                       3.5      4.1    30.7     13.1     24.7      50.9    12.0         45.5    -0.7
        Brazil                                         1.4      1.5    49.2     32.7     16.5       9.2    10.3         40.9    6.7
        China                                          0.9      1.7      5.1    70.3     96.2     186.6   185.6     100.9       1.4

Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
Notes: (a) Obtained from the international trade data released by the INE and the classiﬁcation of manufacturing industries
by technology intensity, based on R&D intensities, released by the OECD. For more details, see http://www.oecd.org/dataoe-
cd/43/41/48350231.pdf. The residual category refers to products that cannot be included in the technology intensity classiﬁcation,
namely agriculture and mining and quarrying products, as well as product for which INE does not release fully detailed data, for
conﬁdentiality reasons, preventing the use of the classiﬁcation by technnology intensity.
                                         Although the external context was very adverse, tourism exports recorded only a moderate slowdown
                                         in 2012, and this meant another increase in Portugal’s share of world tourism in real terms (Chart 5.14).
                                         Tourism exports increased 5.9 per cent in volume (after 6.8 per cent in 2011), with non-residents’ over-
 I                                       night stays in Portugal recording a growth of 5.0 per cent (following 10.1 per cent the year before). To
                                         a large extent, the slowdown reﬂects tourist ﬂows from the United Kingdom, which is Portugal’s main
114
                                         market for tourism exports, and from Spain, where the fall was more than 10 per cent (Chart 5.15).
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         Over and against this, there was a signiﬁcant increase in tourists from Germany, where the economic
                                         situation is comparatively more benign. It should further be mentioned that income from tourism in
                                         nominal terms showed a variation close to what was noted in real terms, given the relative stability of
                                         prices. As regards export of other services, it was registered a decline of 2.7 per cent, in real terms, after
                                         an increase of 5.7 the year before. According to information on the balance of payments released by
                                         Banco de Portugal, this deceleration should, to a considerable degree, reﬂect the unfavourable evolution
                                         of transport services, in a context of deceleration of the export of goods and other services supplied
                                         by companies, namely the triangular trade and other trade intermediation services as well as various
                                         technical-professional services.2


                                         Substantial fall in imports in line with global demand

                                         With domestic demand contracting, imports fell again in 2012. Goods and services were both affected,
                                         with a decline in real terms of 6.9 per cent, after a decline of 5.9 per cent the year before. The slump was
                                         visible in goods (-6.8 per cent) and in services (-7.5 per cent). The result was another fall in the proportion
                                         of imports in overall demand (Chart 5.16). This is in fact the second consecutive year of decline in the
                                         penetration of imports, but there still exists considerable positive accumulated variation, visible since
                                         the euro area was formed. In general terms, the penetration of imports is related with the degree of

                                                      Chart 5.13                                                                                                            Chart 5.14
                                                      CONTRIBUTION OF THE MAIN TRADE PARTNERS                                                                               EVOLUTION OF THE PORTUGUESE MARKET
                                                      TO THE EVOLUTION OF NOMINAL EXPORTS OF                                                                                SHARE IN THE WORLD TOURISM
                                                      GOODS
                                                             3.0                                                                                                                 110
                                                                                                                                                 2011       2012
                                                             2.5

                                                             2.0                                                                                                             105
                                         Percentage points




                                                             1.5

                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                      1999=100




                                                             0.5

                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 95
                                                         -0.5

                                                         -1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 90
                                                         -1.5
                                                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                             France




                                                                                                                                                    China
                                                                                                                                    Italy
                                                                                      Spain
                                                                   Germany




                                                                                                                                                             Brazil
                                                                                              Angola




                                                                                                                               UK




                                                                                                                                            US
                                                                                                       Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                 85
                                                                                                                                                                                       1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011


                                                      Source: INE.                                                                                                          Source: World Travel & Tourism Council
                                                                                                                                                                            Note: Index calculated based on tourism exports at 2011 pri-
                                                                                                                                                                            ces.



                                         2 With regard to the triangular trade, it should be mentioned that it has been strongly inﬂuenced by the overseas
                                           relocation of companies that were previously located in the free zone of Madeira, as a consequence of the
                                           changes to the tax system at the beginning of 2012. In terms of the balance of payments statistics, this resulted
                                           in a substantial fall in both exports and imports associated with this type of service. However, and as far as the
                                           National Accounts are concerned, this type of operation is only considered in net terms, the respective value
                                           being recorded under the export of services.
             Chart 5.15                                                                                                      Chart 5.16
             OVERNIGHT STAYS OF NON-RESIDENTS BY                                                                             IMPORT PENETRATION IN GLOBAL DEMAND | IN
             ORIGIN COUNTRY                                                                                                  REAL TERMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
               12.0        Brazil                                                                                                 6.0               Index 1998=100 (r.h.s.)     Rate of change      120.0
                           UK
                           Netherlands                                                                                                                                                              118.0   115
               10.0        France
                           Spain                                                                                                  4.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Demand
                           Germany                                                                                                                                                                  116.0
                           Total
                    8.0                                                                                                                                                                             114.0
                                                                                                                                  2.0
Percentage points




                                                                                                                       Per cent
                                                                                                                                                                                                    112.0
                    6.0
                                                                                                                                  0.0                                                               110.0

                    4.0                                                                                                                                                                             108.0
                                                                                                                                  -2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    106.0
                    2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    104.0
                                                                                                                                  -4.0
                    0.0                                                                                                                                                                             102.0

                                                                                                                                  -6.0                                                              100.0
                    -2.0                                                                                                                 1999   2001      2003     2005       2007   2009    2011
                               2010        2011                                           2012


             Source: INE.                                                                                                    Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                                                                                                             Note: The penetration of imports assesses the growth of im-
                                                                                                                             ports of goods and services against the growth of global de-
                                                                                                                             mand. An increase indicates a gain in the market share of fo-
                                                                                                                             reign producers.



economic integration, presenting a negative behaviour in contraction periods, as the components with
higher import content are more cyclical.

The change in imports was broadly in line with the decline in the overall demand weighted by import
content (Chart 5.17). It should be mentioned that the evolution of imports in real terms reﬂects the
decline noted in the non- energy component, in view of the fact that there was an increase in the
energy component, which to a large extent is associated to the dynamism of fuel exports. As for the
import of goods excluding fuels, emphasis should be given to the particularly marked fall in some of the
components of demand with a higher import content, as is the case with the consumption of durable
goods and GFCF in machinery and transport equipment. In nominal terms, import of vehicles and other



             Chart 5.17
             IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND THE WEIGHTED GLOBAL DEMAND | REAL RATE OF CHANGE
                                                                                                             15



                                                                                                             10
                                             Imports of goods and services




                                                                                                              5



                                                                                                              0
                                                                             -10          -5                       0                            5                 10


                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                      2011

                                                                                   2009        2012
                                                                                                             -10



                                                                                                         -15
                                                                                                  Weighted global demand


             Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                         transport material fell by 25.1 per cent, while the import of machines and appliances showed a decline of
                                         9.0 per cent. The slowdown in the import of goods was relatively broad-based in terms of geographical
                                         areas, with a nominal drop of 7.6 per cent from intra-community markets and a modest increase of 1.4
 I                                       per cent in the extra-community component (-2.6 and 12.8 per cent in the previous year, respectively).

116                                      Tourism imports, in turn, came in with another drop, reaching 3.5 per cent in 2012 in real terms (-2.1
                                         per cent in 2011). This comes against a backdrop marked by a sharp decline in real disposable income
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         and uncertainty concerning future income, by the continuing deterioration in the labour market and by
                                         stringent conditions governing access to new credit. The decrease reﬂects to a large extent the lacklustre
                                         performance of tourism imports from Spain, which is roughly one third of this component (the ﬁgure
                                         was down 7.8 per cent in nominal terms after a -1.1 per cent variation for the year before). In addition,
                                         there was another fall in overnight stays in Portugal by residents, with numbers down by 7.2 per cent,
                                         following a 2.5 per cent drop a year earlier.

                                         Imports of other services were down by 8.4 per cent in real terms, reﬂecting a negative evolution in the
                                         majority of their components.
BOX 5.1 | THE RISE IN HOUSEHOLDS’ SAVING RATE IN 2012: AN
EXPLANATION BASED ON MACRO AND MICROECONOMIC EVIDENCE

                                                                                                                        5
In 2012, the savings of Portuguese households reached maximum values since the beginning of the euro
area, assessed both in terms of level and as a percentage of disposable income (Chart 1). This box seeks                117
to understand this evolution, in the light of macro and microeconomic evidence. On the one hand, the




                                                                                                                        Demand
regression model presented in Alves and Cardoso (2010) was updated and reestimated.1 On the other
hand, microeconomic evidence is presented, based on the data from the Household Expenditure Survey
(IDEF) 2010/2011 carried out by Statistics Portugal (INE).2

The pattern of savings over time can be explored through the estimation of a model relating the households
saving rate and a set of macroeconomic determinants. In the regression model with an error correction
mechanism estimated in Alves and Cardoso (2010), a stable long-term relation was found between the
households’ saving rate and the following variables: (i) a representative interest rate for deposits (with a
positive sign, as it represents the opportunity cost of current consumption over future consumption); (ii)
the ﬁscal balance excluding temporary measures (with a negative relation to the saving rate, suggesting
some substitution effect between public and private expenditure); and (iii) the rate of change of real
GDP (with a positive sign). The estimated short-term equation, in turn, relates the change in the saving
rate with the long-term equation and with the following macroeconomic variables (in ﬁrst differences):
(i) the ﬁscal balance of general government (as a percentage of GDP); (ii) the growth rate of real GDP;
and (iii) the wealth of households (net of indebtedness and as a percentage of disposable income). The
rate of growth of real GDP represents a proxy for disposable income. The estimated positive relation is
in line with the life cycle theory, in which household consumption is generally smoothed according to
permanent income, and thus temporary ﬂuctuations in disposable income tend to be reﬂected in savings
ﬂuctuations in the same direction. The households’ total net worth presents a negative relation to the
saving rate, indicating that ﬂuctuations in the levels of wealth, resulting in particular from asset price
ﬂuctuations, tend to affect consumption in the same direction.

The speciﬁcation which has now been reestimated includes, besides these variables, the change in the
unemployment rate in the short-term equation.3 This variable aims to capture the effect of uncertainty
as regards future household income, as well as the increase in risk perception of a permanent reduction
in real income. As a matter of fact, a signiﬁcant increase in unemployment, as seen lately, should spur
an increase in precautionary savings by most households. This effect should be more obvious among
households that are not experiencing liquidity constraints.

The model has been re-estimated for the period 1986 to 2012. Chart 2 provides information for the most
recent period, relating the observed values of the change in the saving rate and the values estimated
according to the dynamics of the short-term equation. The model presents a good performance, both
in terms of the sign and the magnitude of the change in the household saving rate. As regards 2012,
the change in the unemployment rate - as an additional proxy to the degree of uncertainty and to the
permanent nature of the current adjustment - provides a fundamental contribution to the estimated
increase of the saving rate.

The equation however underestimates the strong increase that was observed in 2012, albeit within
the usual estimated conﬁdence intervals. Within this context, two issues should be emphasized. One is




1 See Alves, N. and F. Cardoso, (2010), “Household saving in Portugal: micro and macroeconomic evidence””,
  Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin - Winter.
2 For further details regarding this survey see Statistics Portugal (2012), Inquérito às Despesas das Famílias
  2010/2011, INE.
3 This inclusion does not substantially change the coefﬁcients and the statistical signiﬁcance of the other variables
  in the model.
                                                 Chart 1                                                                                                                         Chart 2
                                                 HOUSEHOLD SAVING IN PORTUGAL - LEVELS                                                                                           CHANGES IN THE SAVING RATE - OBSERVED
                                                 AND RATES                                                                                                                       AND ESTIMATED
 I
                                                       16 000        Saving level                                       14.0                                                               6.0       estimated   observed
                                                                     Saving rate (right scale)
118
                                                       14 000                                                           12.0                                                               4.0
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                                                               As a percentage of disposable income
                                                       12 000                                                                                                                              2.0
                                                                                                                        10.0




                                                                                                                                                                      Percentage points
                                                       10 000                                                                                                                              0.0
                                         Eur million




                                                                                                                        8.0
                                                        8 000                                                                                                                              -2.0
                                                                                                                        6.0
                                                        6 000                                                                                                                              -4.0

                                                                                                                        4.0
                                                        4 000                                                                                                                              -6.0

                                                        2 000                                                           2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                           -8.0

                                                           0                                                            0.0                                                               -10.0
                                                                95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12                                                                             86 88 90 92 94 96 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12


                                                 Source: INE (National Accounts).                                                                                                Source: Update and reestimation of Alves and Cardoso (2010).


                                         the increase in liquidity constraints – in a context of a high degree of restrictiveness of credit supply to
                                         households – which should have signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced consumption in some households, contributing
                                         to the increase in the overall household saving rate. The other is that the evolution in savings in 2012
                                         may have been inﬂuenced by a composition effect regarding disposable income developments. In fact, in
                                         2012 there was a major dichotomy between the evolution of compensation of employees (which fell 7.2
                                         percent) and property income (which increased 7.5 percent). In case these two types of income display a
                                         different propensity to save, one should expect a non-negligible composition effect on the saving rate.
                                         This effect should be particularly relevant if the evolution of property income is fundamentally temporary,
                                         given that this would increase the propensity to save that income.

                                         It is possible to make a tentative assessment of this issue based on the Household Expenditure Survey
                                         2010/2011 carried out by Statistics Portugal between March 2010 and February 2011. This survey includes
                                         detailed information about the expenditure and income of close on 17000 households. It is important
                                         to stress that the comparison between the saving rate based on the survey and the rate obtained from
                                         the national accounts has limitations, due to the fact that there are signiﬁcant methodological diffe-
                                         rences between these statistical sources. Nonetheless, the INE survey is a unique database for analysing
                                         the savings proﬁles of Portuguese households. The survey also provides weights for each household,
                                         allowing for extrapolation of the ﬁndings to the population as a whole. These weights were applied in
                                         all the calculations carried out.

                                         Chart 3 characterises the distribution of household savings in Portugal according to the deciles of mone-
                                         tary income4. The savings were calculated simply as the difference between the monetary income and
                                         the monetary expenditure of each household. The chart shows the high inequality in the distribution of
                                         savings in Portugal, with about 87 per cent of the total generated by the two top deciles of the income
                                         distribution.

                                         This last observation is relevant, given that the big increase in property income mentioned above was, for
                                         the most part, associated with the interest received by households and with the increase in other property
                                         income (including, in particular, dividends and rents received). In the 2010/2011 survey of households,


                                         4 Monetary income, monetary expenditure and savings for each household were re-scaled using the OECD modi-
                                           ﬁed equivalence scale, so as to capture differences in the size and composition of the households. This equiva-
                                           lence scale attributes a weight of 1.0 to the ﬁrst adult in the household, 0.5 to the remaining adults and 0.3 to
                                           each child.
this income can be roughly proxied by the information on “Income from property and capital”. Accor-
ding to the survey, about 82 percent of this income is earned by the two higher deciles of the income
distribution, i.e., by those with the higher saving rate.
                                                                                                                                                                                          5
With the aim of illustrating the average propensity to save according to the type of income, monetary
income was broken down into (i) self-employment income, (ii) employee income, (iii) income from property                                                                                  119
and capital, (iv) pensions and (v) social beneﬁts. The calculation of average savings by type of income




                                                                                                                                                                                          Demand
resulted from the aggregation of the savings of each household, weighted with the respective share of
each type of income in total monetary income. Chart 4 presents the results obtained. The chart suggests
that income from property and capital shows an average propensity to save that is clearly higher than
employee income (as well as a higher level of savings, which is consistent with the fact this income is
concentrated in the higher income deciles).5 This suggests that the strong growth in property income
should have also contributed to the increase of the saving rate in 2012.




       Chart 3                                                                     Chart 4
       HOUSEHOLD INCOME, EXPENDITURE AND                                           SAVING LEVELS AND SAVING RATES, BY INCOME
       SAVING, BY MONETARY INCOME DECILE                                           SEGMENTS

             35000   Monetary income                                                     6 000                                                      Saving level                   0.30
                     Monetary expenditure                                                                                                           Saving rate (right scale)
                     Saving
             30000                                                                       5 000                                                                                     0.25

             25000
                                                                                         4 000                                                                                     0.20

             20000
                                                                            Euros/year
Euros/year




                                                                                         3 000                                                                                     0.15
             15000
                                                                                         2 000                                                                                     0.10
             10000
                                                                                         1 000                                                                                     0.05
             5000

                                                                                            0                                                                                      0.00
                0
                                                                                                             employment
                                                                                                 Employees




                                                                                                                                                      benefits




                                                                                                                                                                           Total
                                                                                                                                         Pensions
                                                                                                                          property and
                                                                                                                          Income from




                                                                                                                                                       Social
                                                                                                  income



                                                                                                               income



                                                                                                                             capital
                                                                                                                 Self-




             -5000
                     1    2     3     4    5       6    7      8   9   10
                                       Monetary income deciles


       Source: INE (IDEF 2010/11).                                                 Source: INE (IDEF 2010/11).
       Note: Values re-scaled with the OECD modiﬁed equivalence                    Note: Values re-scaled with the OECD modiﬁed equivalence
       scale.                                                                      scale.




5 It can be added here that the saving rate of the income associated to social beneﬁts is relatively low and that
  the saving rate of income from pensions is relatively high (in line with the results reported in Alves and Cardoso,
  2010).
BOX 5.2 | PORTUGUESE EXPORT MARKET SHARES IN 2012: AN ANALYSIS
BASED ON A SAMPLE OF EXPORT MARKETS

                                                                                                                                                      5
This box analyses the nominal change of the share of Portuguese exports of goods in a sample of export
markets, explicitly considering the inﬂuence of the sectoral and geographical specialization. The database                                            121
used in this analysis is the Global Trade Atlas.




                                                                                                                                                      Demand
Using a methodology of constant market share of analysis, it is possible to evaluate the effects of the
specialization of the economy in the total change of market share, as a country beneﬁts if it is relatively
more specialized in more dynamic sectoral/geographical markets. After discounting this structure effect,
the evolution of the market share will reﬂect the revealed competitiveness in each individual export market.

The breakdown of the total change of market share used includes three main components: a market
share effect, taking into account the effective changes of share in each individual country/product market
and two additional items that measure the impact of the relative specialization of Portuguese exports
by product and geographical destination.1 The analysis of the evolution of market shares is often based
on a notion of external demand in which each country is weighted by its relevance as a destination of
Portuguese exports, regardless of its sectoral composition, as described in “Chapter 5 Demand”, of
this Report. In this case, the inﬂuence of the product specialization is implicitly included in the effective
change of market share.

Chart 1 presents the results of the breakdown of the total change of share based on a sample of nominal
exports to ten important destination countries with a sectoral breakdown into 12 groups of products
deﬁned from the chapters of the Combined Nomenclature (CN), corresponding to around 70 per cent
of Portuguese exports of goods.2 In 2012, the total share of Portuguese exports to these 120 individual
markets as a whole declined by 3.3 per cent in nominal terms, after a 2.7 per cent increase in 2011.
This result was inﬂuenced by a very negative structure effect, as there were still effective gains of share
in these markets as a whole, though lower than those observed in 2011. In particular, the geographical


            Chart 1
            ARITHMETIC BREAKDOWN OF THE NOMINAL CHANGE OF THE SHARE OF PORTUGUESE EXPORTS OF
            GOODS IN A SAMPLE OF 120 INDIVIDUAL MARKETS
                       8.0                                                                              0.0

                       6.0                                                                              -1.0

                       4.0
                                                                                                        -2.0
In percentage points




                                                                                 In percentage points




                       2.0
                                                                                                        -3.0
                       0.0
                                                                                                        -4.0
                       -2.0
                                                                                                        -5.0
                       -4.0
                                                                                                        -6.0
                       -6.0   Market share effect                                                              Geographical structure effect
                              Combined structure effect                                                        Product structure effect
                       -8.0                                                                             -7.0
                              Residual effect                                                                  Mixed structure effect
                              Total change                                                                     Combined structure effect
                -10.0                                                                                   -8.0
                                       2011               2012                                                            2011                 2012


            Sources: Global Trade Atlas and calculations of Banco de Portugal.


1 For more details on this methodology of constant market share analysis, see Cabral, S. and Esteves, P. S. (2006)
  “Portuguese export market shares: an analysis by selected geographical and product markets”, Banco de Portu-
  gal, Economic Bulletin – Summer.
2 The sample includes the ten main geographical destinations of Portuguese exports of goods (Spain, Germany,
  France, United Kingdom, Netherlands, United States, Italy, Belgium, China and Brazil). Angola is excluded be-
  cause there is no detailed information available for calculating the export share in this market.
                                         structure effect gave an especially negative contribution in 2012, reﬂecting, to a large extent, the fact
                                         that imports of Spain - the geographical market that accounts for the largest proportion of Portuguese
                                         exports - recorded a reduction of more than 3 per cent after a growth of more than 9 per cent in 2011.
 I                                       In this context, it is also worth noting the negative contributions arising from the strong decelerations
                                         of nominal imports of Germany, from about 13 per cent in 2011 to less than 1 per cent in 2012, and
122
                                         of France, from more than 12 per cent in 2011 to around 1 per cent in 2012.
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         It is important to analyse the effective change of share of Portuguese exports in each of the 120 indi-
                                         vidual markets considered, excluding the effect of the relative specialization of the country in terms of
                                         geographical distribution and product composition. Table 1 presents the contribution of each individual
                                         market to the market share effect in 2012, highlighting the three most important negative and positive
                                         contributions.

                                         The effective losses of share in the German market of transport equipment represented the most subs-
                                         tantial negative contribution to the market share effect in 2012. However, these losses are closely related
                                         to the fact that Portuguese sales of passenger cars to China were carried out indirectly via Germany until
                                         October 2011. Thus, symmetrically, there were high effective gains of share of Portuguese exports of
                                         transport equipment to China, which contributed positively to the evolution of the aggregate market
                                         share. By contrast, sales of transport equipment to the United Kingdom gave a negative contribution to
                                         the effective change of market share of Portuguese exports.




                                          Table 1
                                           BREAKDOWN OF THE MARKET SHARE EFFECT IN 2012 | CONTRIBUTION OF EACH INDIVIDUAL COUNTRY/PRODUCT
                                          MARKET IN PERCENTAGE POINTS

                                                                                                  United
                                          Code                                                           Nether- United
                                                  Description         Spain Germany France        King-                      Italy Belgium China   Brazil   Total
                                           CN                                                             lands States
                                                                                                   dom
                                                  Agri-food,
                                          01-24   beverages and        0.0       0.0       0.1       0.0       0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0     0.2
                                                  tobacco
                                          27      Mineral fuels       -0.2       0.0       0.1       0.2       0.3    0.9    0.1    -0.1    0.0     0.0     1.3
                                                  Chemicals,
                                          28-40   plastics and         0.2       0.2       0.1       0.1       0.1    -0.1   0.1    -0.1    0.0     0.0     0.5
                                                  rubbers
                                                  Wood, cork, pulp
                                          44-49                        0.3       0.1       0.2       0.0       -0.1   0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0     0.8
                                                  and paper
                                          41-43; Hides, leather,
                                                                       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0    -0.1   0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0
                                          50-59 and textiles
                                                  Apparel and
                                          60-63   clothing             0.4       -0.1      0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0     0.3
                                                  accessories
                                                  Footwear and
                                          64-67                        0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0
                                                  headgear
                                                  Stones, plasters,
                                          68-71   ceramics and        -0.1       -0.1      0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0    0.4    0.2     0.0     0.0     0.3
                                                  glass
                                          25-26; Minerals and base
                                                                   -0.1          0.1       0.3       0.1       0.0    0.0    0.1    0.0     0.2     0.1     0.8
                                          72-83 metals
                                                  Machinery
                                          84-85   and electrical       0.2       0.5      -0.1       0.1       0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.1     0.6
                                                  appliances
                                                  Transport
                                          86-89                       -0.1       -1.3     -0.1      -0.3       0.1    -0.1   0.2    0.1     0.9     0.0     -0.6
                                                  equipment
                                                  Miscellaneous
                                          90-99                        0.1       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0     0.2
                                                  products
                                                  Total                0.7       -0.4      0.6       0.1       0.4    0.8    0.9    0.2     1.0     0.2     4.4
                                          Sources: Global Trade Atlas and calculations of Banco de Portugal.
                                          Note: CN refers to the Combined Nomenclature.
Exports of mineral fuels to the United States stand out for the large positive contribution to the effective
gain of market share 2012. In contrast, Portuguese exports of fuels to Spain contributed negatively to the
evolution of the market share. Finally, the gains of share of exports of machinery and electrical appliances
to Germany gave a positive contribution to the effective change of market share in this sample.                5
The methodology of constant market share analysis allows us to obtain a market share effect that isolates      123
the effective changes of share in each of individual country/product market from the effects related to




                                                                                                               Demand
the product and geographical structure of exports. This market share effect, which shows the ability of
Portuguese ﬁrms to compete effectively with suppliers from other countries in each individual destina-
tion market, was again positive in 2012. Additionally, the total change of market share of exports also
depends on their geographical and sectoral specialization. As observed in recent years, the inﬂuence of
the relative specialization of Portuguese exports on the aggregate behaviour of market shares continued
to be negative in 2012. Despite the growing diversiﬁcation of Portuguese exports to extra-community
markets seen in recent years, the geographical structure effect gave a particularly negative contribution
in 2012. Moreover, the product specialization of Portuguese exports also continued to contribute nega-
tively to the total change of market share.

The entry of Portuguese goods and services in sectoral and geographical markets with a more dynamic
demand and a higher growth potential is essential to ensure a favourable evolution of exports in the
world market, a decisive factor in the current process of adjustment of the Portuguese economy. Ente-
ring new markets is a complex decision, but it must be assumed on corporate strategies. The success of
these internationalization strategies is based on factors that far exceed the costs of production, inclu-
ding geographical aspects, scale of the productive activity, capacity of innovation and incorporation of
technological advances.
6. PRICES                                                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                                                         125
Consumer prices were conditioned by a number of measures associated with the fiscal




                                                                                                                                                                                         Prices
consolidation process

In 2012, the inflation rate in Portugal was 2.8 per cent, as measured by the Harmonized Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP), a 0.8 p.p. fall vis-à-vis 2011 (Chart 6.1). The behaviour of the inflation rate
was largely conditioned by the impact of a number of measures associated with the fiscal consolidation
process, coming on stream in 2011 or 2012. Salient among them was the increase in value added tax
(VAT) applied to some products, a higher tax on tobacco and an increase in prices on a number of goods
and services subject to regulation. The estimates presented in this Report point to a mechanical impact
on the inflation rate in 2012 of around 2.2 p.p. This stemmed from the changes in indirect tax and the
increases in the prices of administered goods and services (See Box 6.1: “The mechanical impact from
indirect taxation and administered prices on the inflation rate”, of this Report).

From the structural point of view, price moves in the Portuguese economy are anchored to the mone-
tary policy of the ECB, guided by the principle of price stability over the medium-term. This situation is
in marked contrast to the one observed in previous adjustments to external imbalances, specifically in
the 1970s and 1980s, when exchange rate devaluations were used as an instrument to obtain gains
in external competitiveness, which in turn resulted in high inflation rates. In those circumstances, the
adjustment cost was felt above all in a reduction in real wages and a loss of value for assets denominated
in the domestic currency.

As things stand now, the deterioration in the cyclical position of the Portuguese economy (Chart 6.2)
can be seen in the under utilization of the factors of production. This has led to downward pressure on
the prices of goods and services and on labour costs. This process is one of the channels through which
will bring come an improvement in price competitiveness for the Portuguese economy in the short term,
in tandem with the continuing rebalancing over the long term, a process based more on other aspects
of competitiveness.

    Chart 6.1                                                                                           Chart 6.2
    HARMONIZED INDEX OF CONSUMER PRICES |                                                               CYCLICAL POSITION OF THE PORTUGUESE
    YEAR-ON-YEAR CHANGE AND ANNUAL AVERAGE, PER CENT                                                    ECONOMY | OUTPUT GAP AS PERCENTAGE OF POTENTIAL
                                                                                                        GDP


                                                                                                                    6.0
           5.0
                          3.0                                     3.6
           4.0                         2.7                               2.8                                        4.0
                   2.1
                                                                                As percentage of potential output




           3.0                                                                                                      2.0

           2.0
                                 2.4                                                                                0.0
Per cent




                                                            1.4
           1.0
                                                     -0.9                                                           -2.0
           0.0

                                                                                                                    -4.0
           -1.0

           -2.0                                                                                                     -6.0
                                                                                                                                         Christiano-Fitzgerald   Baxter-King
                                                                                                                                         Hodrick-Prescott        Cobb-Douglas function
           -3.0                                                                                                     -8.0
                  2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010         2011   2012
                                                                                                                           1985   1990      1995        2000      2005       2010



    Source: Eurostat.                                                                                   Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations.
                                         Prices slow down over 2012 in line with the moves in the usual determinants

                                         The inflation rate came down over the year, in particular in the last quarter, stemming to a large extent
      I                                  from the gradual dissipation of the above-mentioned effects. This development was common to both
                                         the non-energy and the energy consumer prices: the variation in the first over the year as a whole was
126                                      1.7 per cent, following 2.8 per cent in 2011; and the second slowed from 12.8 per cent in 2011 to 9.5
                                         per cent, in line with moves in the price of oil in international markets (Table 6.1). It is therefore not
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         surprising that the inflation rate at year-end 2012, against the backdrop of a significant contraction in
                                         economic activity in the country, came in with figures close to what would be expected given the moves
                                         in its usual determining factors. Indeed, there was a marked slowdown in the prices of non-energy based
                                         imported goods, a smaller increase in the prices of oil in international markets (see Chapter 1 – Interna-
                                         tional Framework) and a steep fall in unit labour costs of across the economy.

                                         In 2012, inflation in the euro area stood at 2.5 per cent. So, for the second year running, the differential
                                         between the inflation rate in Portugal and the euro area average is marginally positive (0.3 p.p.), after
                                         the negative figure for 2010 (-0.2 p.p.) and the record low of -1.2 p.p. in 2009.


                                         There are diverging moves in the main aggregates in the downward path of prices

                                         An analysis of consumer prices based on the main HICP aggregates shows that one of the biggest contri-
                                         butions to the downward path was the price of non-energy industrial goods throughout the year, in
                                         particular the prices of pharmaceutical products and vehicles (Table 6.2). Prices for services and processed
                                         foods moved in the opposite direction, with a higher increase than in 2011.

                                         The change in food prices during the year came fundamentally on the back of the price of commodities,
                                         above all cereals, where the increase was considerable in the second half of the year. The behaviour of
                                         food prices, especially the processed food component, also reflected the maintenance of the steep rise
                                         in the price of tobacco.

                                         Prices for services, which normally display a smoother profile, increased during the year more than in
                                         2011.1 This move followed to a large extent the rise in the prices of some regulated services, along with
                                         the impact of the increase in VAT applied to some services. Among the salient points in the first case were

                                          Table 6.1
                                          PORTUGAL - MAIN INTERNATIONAL PRICE INDICATORS | ANNUAL CHANGE, PER CENT
                                                                                            2010       2011      2012                      2012
                                                                                                                        1º trim.   2º trim.   3º trim.   4º trim.
                                          Import prices of price goods
                                            Total                                            5.3        8.9      1.7       2.5       1.6           1.9     0.8
                                            Total excluding fuel                             1.5        5.3      0.1      -0.4       0.4           0.2     0.1
                                            Consumer goods                                   -1.8       5.4      0.9      -1.0       1.4           2.2     1.2
                                                Food                                         -0.2      12.7      1.3      -1.7       0.2           4.3     2.4
                                                Non-food                                     -2.5       0.3      0.6      -0.4       2.7           0.3     0.0
                                          International commodity prices
                                            Oil prices (Brent Blend), EUR                   35.4       31.7      9.1     17.1        5.1           9.9     5.0
                                            Non-energy commodity prices, EUR                34.0       13.8      -2.9     -9.0      -5.3           0.3     3.3
                                              Food commodity prices, EUR                    15.0       20.9      5.6      -9.5       0.5          19.4    13.8
                                          Nominal effective exchange rate for Portugal       -1.5      -0.1      -1.3     -0.8      -1.7          -1.9    -1.0
                                          Sources: Eurostat, HWWI, INE, Thomson Reuters and Banco de Portugal.



                                         1 Recent evidence based on micro-economic data shows that the sectors where the relative proportion of payroll
                                           costs are typically higher comes in with greater price rigidity. In particular, firms in these sectors tend to adjust
                                           prices more slowly following shocks in demand or costs. The services sector is often cited as an example where
                                           the dynamism of prices is closely circumscribed by payroll rigidity and this plays a part in smoothing out the
                                           profile of prices (see, for example: Martins, Fernando, 2011, “Price stickiness in Portugal: evidence from survey
                                           data”, Managerial and Decision Economics, Vol.31, 2-3, January).
 Table 6.2
 HICP - MAIN AGGREGATES AND CLASSES | PER CENT
                                                               Rate of change            Year-on-year change               6
                                                  Weights   2010   2011    2012   2011                 2012
                                                   2011     Dec     Dec    Dec    Dec    Mar    Jun       Sep       Dec
                                                                                                                           127
 Total                                             100.0    1.4     3.6     2.8    3.5    3.1    2.7          2.9   2.1




                                                                                                                           Prices
 Total excluding energy                             87.3    0.3     2.3     1.7    2.2    1.9    1.7          1.4   1.7
 Total excluding unprocessed food and energy        77.7    0.3     2.2     1.6    2.2    1.9    1.6          1.2   1.5
   Goods                                            58.9    1.7     4.4     2.5    4.3    3.1    2.3          2.5   1.2
       Food                                         20.9    0.4     3.0     3.4    2.7    3.2    3.6          3.3   3.5
         Unprocessed                                 9.6    0.7     2.9     2.8    2.4    1.8    2.8          3.0   3.0
         Processed                                  11.4    0.2     3.1     4.0    3.0    4.3    4.2          3.5   3.8
       Industrial                                   38.0    2.4     5.2     2.0    5.2    3.1    1.7          2.1   0.0
         Non-energy                                 25.2    -0.7    1.4    -2.1    1.5   -1.2   -2.4      -3.5      -2.6
         Energy                                     12.7    9.5    12.8     9.5   12.5   11.1    9.2      12.7      4.6
   Services                                         41.1    1.0     2.4     3.2    2.3    3.2    3.3          3.5   3.4
 Memo:
 CPI                                                   -    1.4     3.7     2.8    3.6    3.1    2.7          2.9   1.9
 GDP Deflator                                          -    0.6     0.5    -0.1      -      -      -            -      -
 Euro Area HICP                                        -    1.6     2.7     2.5    2.7    2.7    2.4          2.6   2.2
 Differential vis-à-vis the Euro Area (in p.p.)        -    -0.2    0.9     0.3    0.8    0.4    0.3          0.3   -0.1
 Sources: Eurostat and Banco de Portugal.



the substantial rise in the cost of public transport and the prices of some services in the health sector,
with increases in initial payments on using the service (the so-called taxas moderadoras) following the
cut in the state’s co-payment in both areas; in the second case, there was the application of a higher
rate of VAT (now at 23 per cent) on prices for coffee shops and restaurants and for cultural services.


A substantial decline in unit labour costs, against a backdrop of a steep fall in wages per
worker across the economy as a whole

In 2012, unit labour costs declined very substantially (3.8 per cent), after a 0.7 per cent fall in 2011
(Chart 6.3). This move reflects the marked fall in compensation per employee across the economy, in
particular in the public sector, with the overall move in salaries in the economy as a whole affected by
the measures taken with regard to public sector salaries, specifically the wage freeze and the partial
suspension of holiday and Christmas bonuses (known as the 13th and 14th months’ pay). And against a
backdrop of deteriorating conditions in the labour market, with the unemployment rate reaching record
highs, salaries in the private sector stood virtually at zero.2 However, something of a positive skew is
expected in aggregate wages, associated with an employment composition structure that typically occurs
in the downturn of a cycle, stemming from a decline in the proportion of workers who are more lowly
paid and possibly less skilled.

The euro area in fact provided a contrast with Portugal, posting an increase in unit labour costs during
the year. In the light of this, the differential between the growth of unit labour costs in Portugal and
the euro area not only stayed negative, as in the previous four years, but in fact reached a record low
during the year.

With the increase of domestic private production prices fundamentally maintaining the momentum of a
year earlier, and with the substantial fall in unit labour costs in the private sector, profit margins looked



2 It is important to mention that some large public enterprises are taken to be part of the private sector for statis-
  tical purposes. These enterprises were also affected by the measures taken on public sector salaries. As a result,
  wages per worker in the private sector in 2012 should also directly reflect cuts in wages in the public sector.
                                         to have risen significantly in 2012 (Chart 6.4). These aggregate profit margins may well have come in
                                         the wake of the impact on wages in the private sector stemming from the measures taken on salaries
                                         in the public sector with a direct effect on some of the state’s business sector, but they may well also
      I                                  have been influenced in the current stage of the adjustment process in the economy by a composition
                                         effect, associated with the closure of companies that performed worse and had lower profit margins.
128
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                               Chart 6.3                                                                             Chart 6.4
                                               UNIT LABOUR COSTS IN PORTUGAL AND IN THE                                              CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ANNUAL RATE OF
                                               EURO AREA | ANNUAL CHANGE, PER CENT                                                   CHANGE OF PRIVATE SECTOR GDP DEFLATOR

                                                    5                                                                                             3.5                         Unit labour costs
                                                                                                                                                                              Net taxes on production and imports
                                                    4                                                                                             3.0                         Operating surplus
                                                                                                                                                                              Private GDP deflator, per cent
                                                    3                                                                                             2.5
                                                         2.1
                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                  2.0
                                                    1                0.0


                                                                                                                              Percentage points
                                                                                0.1                                                               1.5
                                         Per cent




                                                    0
                                                                                       -0.2                                                       1.0
                                                    -1
                                                                                              -1.1                                                0.5
                                                    -2                                                 -1.0     -1.6
                                                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                    -3

                                                    -4                                                                                            -0.5

                                                    -5                                                                                            -1.0

                                                    -6         Diferential (in p.p.)   Euro area     Portugal          -5.3                       -1.5

                                                    -7                                                                                            -2.0
                                                         2005       2006      2007     2008   2009    2010      2011   2012                              2007   2008   2009        2010       2011       2012



                                               Sources: European Commission, INE and Banco de Portugal                               Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal calculations
                                                                                                                                     Note: Private sector GDP corresponds to total GDP excluding
                                                                                                                                     compensation for civil servants and the consumption of fixed
                                                                                                                                     capital by the general government. The contributions are calcu-
                                                                                                                                     lated as in ECB (2003) “Inflation differentials in the euro area”.
BOX 6.1 | THE MECHANICAL IMPACT FROM INDIRECT TAXATION AND
ADMINISTERED PRICES ON THE INFLATION RATE

                                                                                                              6
The Economic and Financial Assistance Programme for the Portuguese economy aims, among other
objectives, at restoring the intertemporal ﬁnancial balance of the public sector and ensuring the ﬁnancial    129
sustainability of State Owned Enterprises. Within this framework, several ﬁscal policy measures have




                                                                                                              Prices
been put in place. Some of them have a direct impact on consumer prices, as they imply a rise in indirect
taxation or in administered prices.

This box provides an estimate of the impact of changes in indirect taxation and administered prices on
the inﬂation rate’s recent evolution.


   Methodology

The analysis uses the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) and the Harmonized Index of Consumer
Prices at Constant Tax rates (HICP-CT). The former measures the changes in the prices of consumer goods
and services acquired by households in the various countries of the European Union. The latter has the
same purpose, but withdraws the tax effect. In other words, it measures price changes assuming that tax
rates are kept constant. The difference between the growth rate of the HICP and of the HICP-CT measures
how shifts in indirect taxation impact price changes. In addition, the growth rate of the HICP-CT can be
further decomposed into the contribution of administered prices and the contribution of the remaining
items, both net of indirect taxation effects.

Notice that this methodology assesses only the mechanical impact of changes in indirect taxation and
of administered prices on the inﬂation rate. In other words, it assumes that the effects stemming from
these measures are immediately and entirely transmitted to the prices of ﬁnal goods and services. This
approach does not consider therefore potential changes in proﬁt margins that may result from these
measures, or general equilibrium effects on agents’ expectations as well as on wage and price formation.


   The effects of indirect taxation and administered prices

Chart 1 decomposes the HICP’s annual average rate of change in the mechanical impact of indirect
taxation and the impact excluding the effects of that same taxation, for the last three years. In 2012,
the inﬂation rate stood at 2.8 per cent (1.4 per cent in 2010 and 3.6 per cent in 2011), of which 1.9
percentage points (p.p.) result from the mechanical impact of increases in indirect taxation (0.4 p.p. in
2010 and 1.3 p.p. in 2011).

Chart 1 presents also a breakdown, by components, of the mechanical impact of changes indirect taxa-
tion on inﬂation. The increase in indirect taxation that took place in 2012 affected, to a large extent,
services and energy goods, with the mechanical impacts standing at 1 and 0.6 p.p., respectively. For
services, this is explained by the increase in the VAT faced by restaurants and cafés, from 13 to 23 per
cent. Concerning energy goods, the impact is explained by the increase in the VAT for electricity and
gas that took place in October 2011. In 2011, the effects of indirect taxation are spread across several
sectors. This is explained by the rise in VAT, in January 2011, for a wide range of products. For energy
goods, the effect in 2011 results from the aforementioned change in the VAT for electricity and gas.

Administered prices, net of the effects of indirect taxation, contributed approximately 0.3 p.p. to the
inﬂation rate in 2012 (0.2 p.p. in 2010 e 0.7 p.p. in 2011). This value is explained by electricity and
transport, which have contributed also 0.3 p.p. to the inﬂation rate. Though the price of pharmaceu-
tical products has declined (contribution of -0.2 p.p.), it was not sufﬁcient to offset the positive impact
of other administered items (which presented a joint contribution of 0.2 p.p. to the inﬂation rate). In
                                         2011, the increase in administered prices is to a large extent explained by the pre-tax price increase in
                                         electricity, transport, and pharmaceutical products (joint contribution of 0.5 p.p. to the inﬂation rate).

                                         To wrap up, changes in indirect taxation and administered prices had an important effect on the inﬂa-
 I
                                         tion rate in recent years, with their mechanical effects standing at 2 p.p. in 2011 and 2.2 p.p. in 2012
130                                      (Chart 2). These impacts compare with an inﬂation rate of 3.6 and 2.8 per cent, respectively. While the
                                         contribution of administered prices to the inﬂation rate went down from 0.7 p.p. in 2011 to 0.3 p.p. in
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         2012, the contribution of changes in indirect taxation went up from 1.3 to 1.9 p.p..




                                                                 Chart 1                                                                           Chart 2
                                                                 EFFECTS OF INDIRECT TAXATION ON THE                                               CONTRIBUTIONS OF INDIRECT TAXATION AND
                                                                 ANNUAL AVERAGE RATE OF CHANGE OF                                                  ADMINISTERED PRICES TO THE INFLATION RATE
                                                                 HICP AND CORRESPONDING COMPONENTS’                                                (IN P.P.)
                                                                 CONTRIBUTIONS (IN P.P.)
                                                                             4.0   Food                                                                          4.0   Indirect taxation
                                                                                   Non-energy industrial goods                                                         Administered prices
                                                                             3.5   Energy goods                                                                        HICP
                                                                                                                                                                 3.5
                                                                                   Services                    3.6           Annual average rate of change (%)                                3.6
                                                                                   HICP
                                         Annual average rate of change (%)




                                                                             3.0                                                                                 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.8
                                                                                                                       2.8
                                                                             2.5                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.2
                                                                                                                     1.9                                                                     2.0
                                                                             2.0                                                                                 2.0


                                                                             1.5                              1.3                                                1.5      1.4
                                                                                     1.4

                                                                             1.0                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                             0.5        0.4                                                                      0.5


                                                                             0.0                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                       2010                  2011    2012                                                 2010               2011   2012


                                                                 Sources: Eurostat and Banco de Portugal.                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
7. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS                                                                                          7

                                                                                                                131
The economy’s external borrowing requirements fell substantially during the year, with a




                                                                                                                Balance of Payments
slight external lending requirement observed in the year as a whole.

In 2012, there was a substantial adjustment in the external accounts, with the joint balance of the current
and capital accounts moving from a deficit of 5.8 per cent of GDP in 2011 to a surplus of 0.8 per cent.
The decline in the economy’s external borrowing requirements in 2012 reflected the significant increase
in domestic savings and, to a lesser degree, the reduction in the rate of investment made by the economy
and the increase in the surplus of net capital transfers (Chart 7.1).

Compared with the 2010 figures, the joint balance of the current and capital accounts improved by 10.2
p.p. (Table 7.1). In this period, domestic savings as a percentage of GDP increased by 4.3 p.p., whereas
investment fell by 4.2 p.p. of GDP. In particular, it should be singled out the significant correction in the
general government savings as a percentage of GDP which, still negative, increased by 2.3 p.p..

If we look at the figures corrected for pension fund transfer operations to the general government
undertaken in the last quarters of 2010 and 2011, it can be seen that a large contribution to this
adjustment came from an increase in the joint overall net lending requirements of households and non-
-financial corporations, together with a decline in the borrowing requirements of general government
(Chart 7.2). Between 2010 and 2012, the lending requirements of households as a percentage of GDP
went up by 1.9 p.p., while the borrowing requirements of non-financial enterprises came down by an
accumulated 3.4 p.p. (Charts 7.3 and 7.4). In the same period, the borrowing requirements of general
government fell by 5.0 p.p..

The substantial fall in the external deficit is one of the most striking features of the adjustment process
under way in the Portuguese economy, and it reflects the combination of the cyclical position of the
economy and a structural change in the relation between savings and investment. A high debt level in
international investment means that this adjustment process of the external accounts must go on for
many years.




 Table 7.1
 CURRENT AND CAPITAL ACCOUNTS | BALANCES AS PERCENTAGES OF GDP
                                        2008    2009    2010    2011   2012   2012   2012      Variation
                                                                               H1     H2       2010-2012
                                                                                                 (p.p.)

 Current and capital account            -11.1   -10.1    -9.4   -5.8    0.8   -1.8   3.5         10.2
   Current account                      -12.6   -10.9   -10.6   -7.0   -1.5   -3.5   0.5          9.0
    Goods and services                   -9.5    -7.0    -7.2   -3.8    0.1   -1.0   1.2          7.3
      Goods                             -13.4   -10.6   -11.1   -8.3   -5.2   -5.1   -5.3         5.9
      Services                           3.8     3.6     3.9    4.5     5.3   4.1    6.5          1.4
        of which:
        Travel and tourism               2.6     2.5     2.7    3.0     3.4   2.3    4.5          0.7
    Income                               -4.5    -5.2    -4.6   -4.9   -3.9   -4.3   -3.4         0.7
    Current transfers                    1.4     1.3     1.3    1.7     2.3   1.9    2.7          1.0
      of which:
      Emmigrant/immigrant remittances    1.1     1.0     1.1    1.1     1.3   1.2    1.5          0.3
 Capital account                         1.1     0.8     1.1    1.2     2.3   1.7    3.0          1.2
 Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                    Chart 7.1                                                                                                                                Chart 7.2
                                                    NET BORROWING/LENDING                                                                                                                    NET BORROWING/LENDING BY INSTITUTIONAL
                                                                                                                                                                                             SECTOR | YEAR CONCLUDED IN EACH QUARTER
      I
                                                                               Net borrowing (-) / lending (+)    Net capital transfers (a)                                                                          Households and non-financial corporations
132                                                               30           Investment                         Savings                                                                                            General government
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Economy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial corporations
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                  25                                                                                                                                                 Financial corporations (non-adjusted)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        6            General government (non-adjusted)
                                                                  20                                                                                                                                                 Non-financial corporations (non-adjusted)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                                                                             As a percentage of GDP
                                         As a percentage of GDP




                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2

                                                                  10                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                   5                                                                                                                                    -2

                                                                                                                                                                                                        -4
                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -6
                                                                   -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -8
                                                                  -10                                                                                                                                  -10

                                                                  -15                                                                                                                                  -12
                                                                        2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012                                                                2007Q1       2008Q1     2009Q1       2010Q1      2011Q1         2012Q1



                                                    Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                                                                      Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                    Notes: (a) Includes the aquisitions less disposals of non-finan-                                                                         Note: (a) Net values, including the aquisitions less disposals of
                                                    cial non-produced assets.                                                                                                                non-financial non-produced assets. (b) These fi gures are adjus-
                                                                                                                                                                                             ted for the direct effect of the transfer of reserves from Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                             Telecom (4th quarter of 2010) and from financial institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                             (4th quarter 2011) to the general government.
                                         Reduction of the joint deficit of the current and capital accounts reflects to a large extent the
                                         behaviour of the goods and services account

                                         The improvement in the external balance in 2012 was due to a great extent to the behaviour of the
                                         goods and services account and, in particular, to the contraction of the goods account deficit. A close to
                                         balance trade account (surplus of 0.1 per cen of GDP) is a new phenomenon in the Portuguese economy
                                         in the last decades.

                                                    Chart 7.3                                                                                                                                Chart 7.4
                                                    NET BORROWING OF NON-FINANCIAL                                                                                                           NET LENDING OF HOUSEHOLDS
                                                    CORPORATIONS

                                                                          Net borrowing (-) / lending (+) (b)    Net borrowing (-) / lending (+)                                                                    Net borrowing/lending          Savings
                                                                          Poupança                               Investment                                                                            12           Investment                     Net capital transfers (a)      12
                                                                          Net capital transfers (a)              Net capital transfers (a)(b)
                                                                  20                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                        9                                                                         9
                                                                  15                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                              As a percentage of GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       As a percentage of GDP
                                         As a percentage of GDP




                                                                                                                                                    As a percentage of GDP




                                                                  10                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                        6                                                                         6

                                                                   5                                                                          5


                                                                   0                                                                          0                                                         3                                                                         3


                                                                  -5                                                                          -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                         0
                                                             -10                                                                              -10


                                                             -15                                                                              -15                                                      -3                                                                         -3
                                                                        2000     2002       2004       2006      2008       2010       2012                                                                  2000      2002     2004        2006      2008       2010      2012



                                                    Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                                                                                      Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                                    Notes: (a) Net values, including the aquisitions less disposals of                                                                       Notes: (a) Net values, including the aquisitions less disposals
                                                    non-financial non-produced assets. (b) These figures are adjus-                                                                          of non-financial non-produced assets. (b) These fi gures are
                                                    ted for the direct effect of the transfer of reserves from Portugal                                                                      adjusted for the direct effect of the transfer of reserves from
                                                    Telecom (in 2010) and from financial institutions (in 2011) to                                                                           Portugal Telecom (in 2010) and from financial institutions (in
                                                    the general government.                                                                                                                  2011) to the general government.
The sharp reduction in the goods account deficit reflected to a large extent a positive and significant
volume effect, in particular for the non-energy component, associated with the growth in exports, though
lower than what was recorded for 2011, along with the plunge in imports in real terms, in line with the
decline in domestic demand (Charts 7.5 and 7.6).1 There was a significant growth in fuel exports which                                               7
resulted in a positive volume effect, but the energy component was still a weight on the downside of
                                                                                                                                                     133
the balance for goods and services, reflecting a negative price effect associated with the increase in price




                                                                                                                                                     Balance of Payments
for energy products in international markets.


Reduction and shift in the composition of the income balance, reflecting the change in the
economy’s financing structure

The improvement in the current account balance was due to the widening of the surpluses in the current
transfers and in capital account as well as to the narrowing of the income deficit.

The behaviour in the current transfers balance in 2012 reflected essentially the maintenance of the large
current transfers from the European Union and the substantial growth in net emigrant remittances. Addi-
tionally, the improvement in the capital account balance, especially in the second half of the year, was
explained to a great extent by the particularly high level of net capital transfers from the European Union.

As to the income account, the fall observed in the deficit in 2012 reflects the change in the structure of
financing in the Portuguese economy, with an increase in the sources of official financing as opposed to
financing through the international financial markets. In 2012, all the main components of the income
balance (incomes from direct and portfolio investment and compensation of employees) had their
deficits cut, with the exception of income from other investment. During this period, it was particularly
significant the decline in the deficit from direct investment income as a percentage of GDP, motivated by
the large fall in incomes paid to external institutions, namely dividends paid to corporations from their
participation in the capital of domestic corporations in the form of direct investment.


    Chart 7.5                                                                     Chart 7.6
    CHANGE IN THE BALANCE OF GOODS ACCOUNT                                        CHANGE IN THE BALANCE OF THE GOODS AND
    | IMPORTS AND EXPORTS CONTRIBUTION                                            SERVICES ACCOUNT | BREAKDOWN IN VOLUME, PRICE,
                                                                                  TERMS OF TRADE AND CROSSED


                          Imports' contribution                                      10000           Terms of trade effect   Price effect
           15000                                                                                     Crossed effect          Volume effect
                          Exports' contribution
                          Balance variation                                                          Balance variation
                                                                                         8000

           10000
                                                                                         6000


                                                                                         4000
 EUR million




               5000
                                                                           EUR million




                                                                                         2000

                  0                                                                         0


                                                                                         -2000
               -5000
                                                                                         -4000


       -10000                                                                            -6000
                       2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012                         2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012



    Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.                                           Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
    Note: The contribution of imports corresponds to the symme-
    trical of its variation.


1 For a more detailed explanation about the way the variation in the goods balance is broken down into the volu-
  me, price, terms of trade and the crossed (residual) effects, see “Box Change in goods account balance in the
  first semester of 2012”, Banco de Portugal, Economic Bulletin - Autumn.
                                         The flows on the financial account for 2012 reflected the surplus on the current and capital
                                         account balance and the recomposition of external financing for the Portuguese economy

      I                                  In 2012, there was a small net outflow of funds abroad, reflecting the surplus on the combined current
                                         and capital account (Charts 7.7 and 7.8). This situation is a striking feature in the process of correcting
134                                      the external imbalance, following very high deficits recorded over a prolonged period. There was a fall
                                         (in line with 2011) in both liabilities and assets to the exterior, though in the last case to a lesser degree
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                         than the previous year.

                                         In this context, the evolution in the financial account stemmed from the recomposition of external finan-
                                         cing, given the difficulties of resident economic agents in accessing finance in the international wholesale
                                         debt markets. This occurred in spite of the progressive improvement in the perception of risk among
                                         international investors over the year. As a result, for the year as a whole, there was a substantial fall in
                                         net portfolio investment liabilities, across the various resident institutional sectors. In the last quarter of
                                         2012, however, some of the main Portuguese banking groups once more began to issue senior unsecured
                                         debt securities on the international markets.2 External financing was ensured above all by a considerable
                                         inward flow into general government, associated with disbursement payments of loans obtained under
                                         the economic and financial assistance programme. In addition, financing was ensured through greater
                                         use of ECB monetary policy operations – from the standpoint of recording this on the financial account,
                                         there has been a rise in liabilities for other investment by monetary authorities associated with the posi-
                                         tion on Target3 –, and by the net inflow of funds associated with non-residents’ capital holdings in major
                                         Portuguese corporations (found under the heading of direct foreign investment).




                                          Chart 7.7
                                          FINANCIAL ACCOUNT | BALANCE AND CHANGES IN ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

                                                                                                  40                                       Changes in assets
                                                                                                                                           Changes in liabilities
                                                                                                                                           Total
                                                                                                  30


                                                                                                  20
                                                                              Percentage of GDP




                                                                                                  10


                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                  -10


                                                                                                  -20


                                                                                                  -30
                                                                                                        2000   2002   2004   2006   2008       2010        2012



                                          Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                          Notes: A (+) sign means an increase in foreign liabilities or a decrease in foreign assets, i.e. a financial inflow. A (-) sign means decrea-
                                          se in foreign liabilities or an increase in foreign assets, i.e. a financial outflow. Figures for “Other investment” of monetary authorities
                                          and other monetary and financial institutions are adjusted for temporary end-of-year operations between these two sectors, which
                                          were reversed in the first days of the following year. The change in assets includes financial derivatives net of liabilities.



                                         2 It should be noted that by January 2013, general government resumed emissions of 5-years Government bonds
                                           totalling 2500 million euros at an annual interest rate of 4.35 per cent. More recently, in May 2013, general go-
                                           vernment resumed emissions of 10-years Government bonds totalling 3000 million euros at an annual interest
                                           rate of 5.65 per cent.
                                         3 Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement Express Transfer System for the euro, i.e. a system for
                                           payments and receipts by Banco de Portugal to/from central banks belonging to ESCB.
             Chart 7.8
             FINANCIAL ACCOUNT | BALANCE AND CHANGES IN ASSETS AND LIABILITIES BY INSTITUTIONAL SECTOR
                    40
                                                                                               Changes in liabilities
                                                                                                                                                             7
                                                                                               Other resident sectors
                    30                                                                         Other monetary and financial institutions                     135
                                                                                               General government




                                                                                                                                                             Balance of Payments
                                                                                               Monetary authorities
                    20
Percentage of GDP




                                                                                               Changes in assets
                    10                                                                         Other resident sectors
                                                                                               Other monetary and financial institutions
                     0                                                                         General government
                                                                                               Monetary authorities

                    -10
                                                                                               Financial account

                    -20


                    -30
                          200001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12   11 11 12 12
                                                                    H1 H2 H1 H2




             Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
             Notes: A (+) sign means an increase in foreign liabilities or a decrease in foreign assets, i.e. a financial inflow. A (-) sign means decrea-
             se in foreign liabilities or an increase in foreign assets, i.e. a financial outflow. Figures for “Other investment” of monetary authorities
             and other monetary and financial institutions are adjusted for temporary end-of-year operations between these two sectors, which
             were reversed in the first days of the following year. The change in assets includes financial derivatives net of liabilities.



The international investment position of the Portuguese economy was significantly affected
by the increase in the market value of the Portuguese public debt securities observed during
2012

In 2012, despite the surplus on the current and capital account, there was a considerable worsening of
the debt position of the Portuguese economy vis-à-vis the rest of the world, standing at 116.5 per cent
of GDP at year-end, representing an increase of 11.7 p.p. (Chart 7.9). This increase stemmed almost
entirely from the appreciation in portfolio investment liabilities, especially regarding Portuguese public
debt securities, in line with the fall in medium- and long-term yields on Portuguese issuers. It should
be remembered that debt securities are recorded on the basis of mark-to-market under the heading of
international investment.
                                         Chart 7.9
                                         INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION
      I
                                                                                               20

136                                                                                             0
BANCO DE PORTUGAL | ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                                                                               -20




                                                                           Percentage of GDP
                                                                                               -40


                                                                                               -60


                                                                                               -80


                                                                                      -100

                                                                                                        Monetary gold
                                                                                      -120              Debt (a)
                                                                                                        Shares and direct investment
                                                                                                        Total
                                                                                      -140
                                                                                                     1999     2001      2003     2005   2007   2009   2012



                                         Sources: INE and Banco de Portugal.
                                         Note: (a) Includes debt securities, other investment, financial derivatives, participation units in investment funds, securitisation units
                                         and other. This debt concept is different from the one published in Table A.3.2. of the Statistical Bulletin of Banco de Portugal, since
                                         participation units in investment funds, securitisation units and other participation securities are recorded as debt. Additionally, the
                                         debt concept used here does not include the difference between direct investment assets and liabilities, presented as other capital,
                                         regarding available funds and liabilities over subsidiaries and direct investors. In this chart these elements are included in ”Shares
                                         and direct investment”. This way, this different treatment does not change the total value of the International Investment Position.
                     ANNUAL REPORT
                     The Portuguese Economy in 2012




ANNUAL REPORT 2012




                                 EUROSYSTEM
